PMID- 24932813
TI  - Clinicopathological correlations of podoplanin (gp38) expression in rheumatoid synovium and its potential contribution to fibroblast platelet crosstalk.
AB  - Synovial fibroblasts (SF) undergo phenotypic changes in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) that contribute to inflammatory joint destruction. This study was undertaken to evaluate the clinical and functional significance of ectopic podoplanin (gp38) expression by RA SF.Expression of gp38 and its CLEC2 receptor was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in synovial arthroscopic biopsies from RA patients and normal and osteoarthritic controls. Correlation between gp38 expression and RA clinicopathological variables was analyzed. In patients rebiopsied after anti-TNF- therapy, changes in gp38 expression were determined. Platelet-SF coculture and gp38 silencing in SF were used to analyze the functional contribution of gp38 to SF migratory and invasive properties, and to SF platelet crosstalk.gp38 was abundantly but variably expressed in RA, and it was undetectable in normal synovial tissues. Among clinicopathologigal RA variables, significantly increased gp38 expression was only found in patients with tertiary lymphoid structure (LN), and RF or ACPA autoantibodies. Cultured synovial but not dermal fibroblasts showed strong constitutive gp38 expression that was further induced by TNF-. In RA patients, anti-TNF- therapy significantly reduced synovial gp38 expression. In RA synovium, CLEC2 receptor expression was only observed in platelets. gp38 silencing in cultured SF did not modify their migratory and invasive properties but reduced the expression of IL-6 and IL-8 genes induced by SF-platelet interaction.In RA, synovial expression of gp38 is strongly associated to LN and it is reduced after anti-TNF- therapy. Interaction between gp38 and CLEC2 platelet receptor is feasible in RA synovium in vivo and can specifically contribute to gene expression by SF.

PMID- 24498556
TI  - Characteristics of tertiary lymphoid structures in primary cancers.
AB  - Tumors are sustained by complex networks of interactions between malignant cells, stromal cells and tumor-infiltrating immune cells. These networks differ from patient to patient in terms of nature, composition and organization as well as with regard to the precise localization of tumor-infiltrating cells. Of note, the heterogeneity of the immunological component of the tumor microenvironment, as opposed to its mere abundance, has been shown to influence disease outcome. However, a key question remains: where does the activation of tumor-specific T cells take place? The recently described, tumor-associated lymph node-like entities termed "tertiary lymphoid structures" exhibit a structural organization that is reminiscent of secondary lymphoid organs, and thus may imprint the local immune contexture. Here, we discuss how cancer-associated tertiary lymphoid structures impact on the tumor micro-architecture, immune microenvironment, and ultimately, patient survival.

PMID- 20011704
TI  - CXCL13 expression in Chlamydia trachomatis infection of the female reproductive tract.
AB  - Chlamydia trachomatis is the most common cause of acute salpingitis worldwide. The socioeconomic impact of sexually transmitted infections (STI) caused by C. trachomatis is considerable. The purpose of this study was to investigate secretion of a unique chemokine, CXCL13, during the inflammatory process in human fallopian tube tissue in response to infection with C. trachomatis. We employed two models for our experiments: archived fallopian tube paraffin sections from known cases of salpingitis of unknown etiology and human fallopian tube organ culture established from fresh fallopian tube biopsies subsequently infected in vitro with C. trachomatis serovar E. We used immunohistochemistry, microarray analysis and cytometric bead array to study these specimens. In both models, we found that the fallopian tissue infected with C. trachomatis expressed CXCL13 and other characteristics of tertiary lymphoid structure. In addition, we found that CXCL13 was expressed in multiple cell types, including endothelial cells, demonstrating a mechanism for the lymphoid aggregation seen in fallopian tube tissue during salpingitis and infection with C. trachomatis.

PMID- 21199347
TI  - Cytomegalovirus latency promotes cardiac tertiary lymphoid structure and accelerated allograft rejection in CMV naive recipients.
AB  - Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection is associated with the acceleration of transplant vascular sclerosis (TVS) and chronic allograft rejection (CR). HCMV-negative recipients of latently HCMV infected donor grafts are at highest risk for developing CMV disease. Using a rat heart transplant CR model, we have previously shown that acute rat CMV (RCMV) infection following transplantation significantly accelerates both TVS and CR. Here, we report that RCMV-nave recipients of heart allografts from latently RCMV-infected donors undergo acceleration of CR with similar kinetics as acutely infected recipients. In contrast to acutely infected recipients, treatment of recipients of latently infected donor hearts with ganciclovir did not prevent CR or TVS. We observed the formation of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLOs) containing macrophages and T cells in latently infected hearts prior to transplantation but not in uninfected rats. Moreover, pathway analysis of gene expression data from allografts from latently infected donors indicated an early and sustained production of TLO-associated genes compared to allografts from uninfected donors. We conclude that RCMV-induced TLO formation and alteration of donor tissue T cell profiles prior to transplantation in part mediate the ganciclovir-insensitive rejection of latently infected donor allografts transplanted into nave recipients by providing a scaffold for immune activation.

PMID- 12454301
TI  - Characterisation of adhesion receptors mediating lymphocyte adhesion to bronchial endothelium provides evidence for a distinct lung homing pathway.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The lung is an important tertiary lymphoid structure and many lung diseases are associated with disordered lung immunity. Unlike the gut (alpha4beta7 binding to MAdCAM-1) and skin (CLA+ve T cells binding to E-selectin) where the adhesion receptors involved in organ specific homing of T cells have been identified, the molecular pathways controlling lymphocyte migration to the lung are unclear. Using a modified version of the Stamper-Woodruff assay we have investigated the receptors mediating adhesion of peripheral blood lymphocytes to airway endothelium. METHODS: Longitudinal frozen sections of bronchus (8 micro m) obtained from lung resection specimens were incubated with T cell enriched peripheral blood mononuclear cells for 30 minutes under shaking conditions in the presence of a fluorescently labelled polyclonal anti-von Willebrand antibody to identify blood vessels. After fixation the percentage of blood vessels supporting adhesion was measured. Blocking monoclonal antibodies were used to determine the role of individual adhesion receptors in lymphocyte binding. RESULTS: Specific cation dependent binding of lymphocytes to bronchial endothelium was observed which was significantly inhibited by antibodies against P-selectin, PSGL-1, L-selectin, LFA-1, ICAM-1 and ICAM-2 but not E-selectin, VLA-4, VCAM-1 or Mac-1. This was consistent with the pattern of endothelial expression of these receptors with strong expression of P-selectin and ICAM-1, but negligible expression of E-selectin on bronchial endothelium. CONCLUSION: This study suggests an important role for PSGL-1/P-selectin in T cell migration into the bronchi and provides further evidence for a pattern of recirculation for respiratory tract homing T cells distinct from the gut and skin.

PMID- 25879435
TI  - CXCL13 antibody for the treatment of autoimmune disorders.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Homeostatic B Cell-Attracting chemokine 1 (BCA-1) otherwise known as CXCL13 is constitutively expressed in secondary lymphoid organs by follicular dendritic cells (FDC) and macrophages. It is the only known ligand for the CXCR5 receptor, which is expressed on mature B cells, follicular helper T cells (Tfh), Th17 cells and regulatory T (Treg) cells. Aberrant expression of CXCL13 within tertiary lymphoid structure has been linked to the development of autoimmune disorders (e.g. Rheumatoid Arthritis, Multiple Sclerosis, Systemic Lupus Erythematosis). We, therefore, hypothesized that antibody-mediated disruption of the CXCL13 signaling pathway would interfere with the formation of tertiary lymphoid structure in the target organs and inhibit autoimmune disease progression. This work describes pre-clinical development of human anti-CXCL13 antibody MAb 5261 and includes therapeutic efficacy data of its mouse counterpart in murine models of autoimmunity. RESULTS: We developed a human IgG1 monoclonal antibody, MAb 5261 that specifically binds to human, rodent and primate CXCL13 with an affinity of approximately 5 nM and is capable of neutralizing the activity of CXCL13 from these various species in in vitro functional assays. For in vivo studies we have engineered a chimeric antibody to contain the same human heavy and light chain variable genes along with mouse constant regions. Treatment with this antibody led to a reduction in the number of germinal centers in mice immunized with 4-Hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl hapten conjugated to Keyhole Limpet Hemocyanin (NP-KLH) and, in adoptive transfer studies, interfered with the trafficking of B cells to the B cell areas of mouse spleen. Furthermore, this mouse anti-CXCL13 antibody demonstrated efficacy in a mouse model of Rheumatoid arthritis (Collagen-Induced Arthritis (CIA)) and Th17-mediated murine model of Multiple Sclerosis (passively-induced Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE)). CONCLUSIONS: We developed a novel therapeutic antibody targeting CXCL13-mediated signaling pathway for the treatment of autoimmune disorders.

PMID- 24695950
TI  - Manipulation of tumour-infiltrating B cells and tertiary lymphoid structures: a novel anti-cancer treatment avenue?
AB  - Combining different standard therapies with immunotherapy for the treatment of solid tumours has proven to yield a greater clinical benefit than when each is applied separately; however, the percentage of complete responses is still far from optimal, and there is an urgent need for improved treatment modalities. The latest literature data suggest that tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS), previously shown to correlate with the severity of autoimmune diseases or transplant rejection, are also formed in tumours, have a significant beneficial effect on survival and might reflect the generation of an effective immune response in close proximity to the tumour. Thus, the facilitation of TLS formation in tumour stroma could provide novel means to improve the efficiency of immunotherapy and other standard therapies. However, little is known about the mechanisms regulating the formation of tumour-associated TLS. Studies of chronic inflammatory diseases and transplant rejection have demonstrated that TLS formation and/or function requires the presence of B cells. Additionally, the infiltration of B cells into the tumour stroma has been demonstrated to be a significant prognostic factor for improved survival in different human tumours. This suggests that B cells could play a beneficial role in anti-tumour immune response not only in the context of antibody production, antigen presentation and Th1-promoting cytokine production, but also TLS formation. This review focuses on the latest discoveries in tumour-infiltrating B cell functions, their role in TLS formation and relevance in human tumour control, revealing novel opportunities to improve cancer therapies.

PMID- 18802153
TI  - Long-term survival for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer with intratumoral lymphoid structures.
AB  -  PURPOSE: It has been established that the immune system plays an important role in tumor rejection. There is also compelling evidence that immune responses can develop independently of secondary lymphoid organs in tertiary lymphoid structures. We studied the presence and the correlation of tertiary lymphoid structures with clinical outcome in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), as the prognostic value of these structures in patients with cancer had not yet been established. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study was performed by immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded tissue specimens from 74 patients with early-stage NSCLC. RESULTS: tertiary lymphoid structures were detected in some tumors but not in nontumoral lungs. Thus we called these structures tertiary lymphoid structure (Ti-BALT). As in lymph nodes, Ti-BALTs were composed of mature dendritic cell (DC)/T-cell clusters adjacent to B-cell follicles and had features of an ongoing immune response. Because the quantitative counting of Ti-BALT was difficult to achieve, we used mature DCs that homed exclusively in Ti-BALT as a specific marker of these structures. Univariate analysis showed that the density of mature DCs was highly associated with a favorable clinical outcome (overall, disease-specific, and disease-free survival), suggesting that Ti-BALT may participate in antitumoral immunity. The density of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, in particular, CD4(+) and T-bet(+) Th1 T cells, was profoundly decreased in tumors weakly infiltrated by mature DCs. CONCLUSION: The density of mature DCs was found to be a better predictor of clinical outcome than the other parameters tested. The number of tumor-infiltrating mature DCs may identify patients with early-stage NSCLC who have a high risk of relapse.

PMID- 10751336
TI  - Lymphoid tissue homing chemokines are expressed in chronic inflammation.
AB  - Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) and B lymphocyte chemoattractant (BLC) are homing chemokines that have been implicated in the trafficking of lymphocytes and dendritic cells in lymphoid organs. Lymphotoxin-alpha (LTalpha), a cytokine crucial for development of lymphoid organs, is important for expression of SLC and BLC in secondary lymphoid organs during development. Here we report that transgenic expression of LTalpha induces inflammation and ectopic expression of SLC and BLC in the adult animal. LTbeta was not necessary for induction of BLC and SLC in inflamed tissues, whereas, in contrast, tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 was found to be important for the LTalpha-mediated induction of these chemokines. The ectopic expression of LTalpha is associated with a chronic inflammation that closely resembles organized lymphoid tissue and this tertiary lymphoid structure can also be seen in several chronic inflammatory diseases, including in the pancreas of the prediabetic nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse. Expression of SLC was also observed in the pancreas of prediabetic NOD mice. This study implicates BLC and SLC in chronic inflammation and presents further evidence that LTalpha orchestrates lymphoid organogenesis both during development and in inflammatory processes.

PMID- 26286991
TI  - IL-22 regulates lymphoid chemokine production and assembly of tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - The series of events leading to tertiary lymphoid structure (TLO) formation in mucosal organs following tissue damage remain unclear. Using a virus-induced model of autoantibody formation in the salivary glands of adult mice, we demonstrate that IL-22 provides a mechanistic link between mucosal infection, B-cell recruitment, and humoral autoimmunity. IL-22 receptor engagement is necessary and sufficient to promote differential expression of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12 and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 13 in epithelial and fibroblastic stromal cells that, in turn, is pivotal for B-cell recruitment and organization of the TLOs. Accordingly, genetic and therapeutic blockade of IL-22 impairs and reverses TLO formation and autoantibody production. Our work highlights a critical role for IL-22 in TLO-induced pathology and provides a rationale for the use of IL-22-blocking agents in B-cell-mediated autoimmune conditions.

PMID- 25443495
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structures in cancer and beyond.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) are tertiary lymphoid structure found in inflamed, infected, or tumoral tissues. They exhibit all the characteristics of structures in the lymph nodes (LN) associated with the generation of an adaptive immune response, including a T cell zone with mature dendritic cells (DC), a germinal center with follicular dendritic cells (FDC) and proliferating B cells, and high endothelial venules (HEV). In this review, we discuss evidence for the roles of TLS in chronic infection, autoimmunity, and cancer, and address the question of whether TLS present beneficial or deleterious effects in these contexts. We examine the relationship between TLS in tumors and patient prognosis, and discuss the potential role of TLS in building and/or maintaining local immune responses and how this understanding may guide therapeutic interventions.

PMID- 26502405
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure function as microniches for tumor progenitor cells in hepatocellular carcinoma.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structure (ELSs) are often observed in cancer, yet their function is obscure. Although ELSs signify good prognosis in certain malignancies, we found that hepatic ELSs indicated poor prognosis for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We studied an HCC mouse model that displayed abundant ELSs and found that they constituted immunopathological microniches wherein malignant hepatocyte progenitor cells appeared and thrived in a complex cellular and cytokine milieu until gaining self-sufficiency. The egress of progenitor cells and tumor formation were associated with the autocrine production of cytokines previously provided by the niche. ELSs developed via cooperation between the innate immune system and adaptive immune system, an event facilitated by activation of the transcription factor NF-B and abolished by depletion of T cells. Such aberrant immunological foci might represent new targets for cancer therapy.

PMID- 21435450
TI  - Association of T-zone reticular networks and conduits with tertiary lymphoid structure in mice and humans.
AB  - Ectopic or tertiary lymphoid structure (TLTs) are often induced at sites of chronic inflammation. They typically contain various hematopoietic cell types, high endothelial venules, and follicular dendritic cells; and are organized in tertiary lymphoid structure. Although fibroblastic stromal cells may play a role in TLT induction and persistence, they have remained poorly defined. Herein, we report that TLTs arising during inflammation in mice and humans in a variety of tissues (eg, pancreas, kidney, liver, and salivary gland) contain stromal cell networks consisting of podoplanin(+) T-zone fibroblastic reticular cells (TRCs), distinct from follicular dendritic cells. Similar to lymph nodes, TRCs were present throughout T-cell-rich areas and had dendritic cells associated with them. They expressed lymphotoxin (LT)  receptor (LTR), produced CCL21, and formed a functional conduit system. In rat insulin promoter-CXCL13-transgenic pancreas, the maintenance of TRC networks and conduits was partially dependent on LTR and on lymphoid tissue inducer cells expressing LTR ligands. In conclusion, TRCs and conduits are hallmarks of secondary lymphoid organs and of well-developed TLTs, in both mice and humans, and are likely to act as important scaffold and organizer cells of the T-cell-rich zone.

PMID- 20603617
TI  - The unexpected role of lymphotoxin beta receptor signaling in carcinogenesis: from lymphoid tissue formation to liver and prostate cancer development.
AB  - The cytokines lymphotoxin (LT) alpha, beta and their receptor (LTbetaR) belong to the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily, whose founder-TNFalpha-was initially discovered due to its tumor necrotizing activity. LTbetaR signaling serves pleiotropic functions including the control of lymphoid organ development, support of efficient immune responses against pathogens due to maintenance of intact lymphoid structures, induction of tertiary lymphoid structure, liver regeneration or control of lipid homeostasis. Signaling through LTbetaR comprises the noncanonical/canonical nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) pathways thus inducing chemokine, cytokine or adhesion molecule expression, cell proliferation and cell survival. Blocking LTbetaR signaling or Fcgamma-receptor mediated immunoablation of LT-expressing cells was demonstrated to be beneficial in various infectious or noninfectious inflammatory or autoimmune disorders. Only recently, LTbetaR signaling was shown to initiate inflammation-induced carcinogenesis, to influence primary tumorigenesis and to control reemergence of carcinoma in various cancer models through distinct mechanisms. Indeed, LTbetaR signaling inhibition has already been used as efficient anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer therapy in some experimental models. Here, we review the pleiotropic functions attributed to LT, the effects of its deregulation and extensively discuss the recent literature on LT's link to carcinogenesis.

PMID- 26475777
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structures: prognostic significance and relationship with tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes in triple-negative breast cancer.
AB  - Tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) have a strong prognostic significance, particularly in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). One important source of TILs in breast cancer is tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs).To carry out a histological analysis of surgically resected TNBC to identify the location of TLSs, the relationship between TLSs and TILs and their prognostic significance in TNBC.We retrospectively analysed 769 patients with TNBC.TILs were defined as the percentage of stroma of invasive carcinoma infiltrated by lymphocytes. TLSs were mainly present within adjacent terminal duct lobular units and around in situ components. TNBC with higher levels of TILs showed a higher nuclear grade, lower lymphovascular invasion, less accompanying in situ component, a homogeneous growth pattern, necrosis in invasive areas, low levels of tumour stroma, high levels of peritumoral lymphocytic infiltration and moderate to abundant TLSs in adjacent tissue. TILs, the degree of peritumoral lymphocytic infiltration and adjacent TLSs were prognostic factors for disease-free and overall survival. Although the TIL level did not have a prognostic value in stage I, it added significant prognostic information for stages II and III. Conversely, patients with high levels of TILs did not show prognostic differences according to the pTNM stage. Patients with high levels of TILs (>60%) and moderate to abundant TLSs had significantly better disease-free survival than those with high levels of TILs but none or few TLSs.TLSs are frequently present in TNBC and are closely associated with TILs. TILs provide additional prognostic information in patients with TNBC with a higher pTNM stage.

PMID- 25942397
TI  - Intratumoral tertiary lymphoid structure is a favourable prognosticator in patients with pancreatic cancer.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Host immunity has critical roles in tumour surveillance. tertiary lymphoid structure (TLOs) are induced in various inflamed tissues. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinicopathological and pathobiological characteristics of tumour microenvironment in pancreatic ductal carcinoma (PDC) with TLOs. METHODS: We examined 534 PDCs to investigate the clinicopathological impact of TLOs and their association with tumour-infiltrating immune cells, the cytokine milieu, and tissue characteristics. RESULTS: There were two different localisations of PDC-associated TLOs, intratumoral and peritumoral. A better outcome was observed in patients with intratumoral TLOs, and this was independent of other survival factors. The PDC tissues with intratumoral TLOs showed significantly higher infiltration of T and B cells and lower infiltration of immunosuppressive cells, as well as significantly higher expression of Th1- and Th17-related genes. tertiary lymphoid structure developed with an association with arterioles, venules, and nerves. These structures were reduced in an association with cancer invasion in PDC tissues, except for those with intratumoral TLOs. The PDC tissues with intratumoral TLOs had capillaries consisting of mature endothelial cells covered by pericytes. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the presence of intratumoral TLOs represents a microenvironment that has an active immune reaction, and shows a relatively intact vascular network retained.

PMID- 21642860
TI  - The Association of tertiary lymphoid structure with early-stage non-small cell lung cancer.
AB  -  INTRODUCTION: Lung cancers can display immune cell infiltration although the role of an adaptive immune response in disease pathogenesis is unknown. To investigate the possibility of a functional humoral response to the tumor, we surveyed histologic sections from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumors for germinal centers (GCs) and assessed whether there was an association between the presence of GCs and tumor stage. METHODS: Tumor sections from 91 patients with all stages of NSCLC were examined by a pathologist blinded to clinical data. GCs were identified by hematoxylin and eosin staining patterns and confirmed by immunohistochemical staining for B-cell markers, BCL-6 and CD21. The distribution of GCs within the tumor or the tumor margin was recorded. Statistical analysis was performed to evaluate the association between stage and presence of GCs. RESULTS: Thirty-five percent of all tumors evaluated contained GCs, and sections evaluated by immunohistochemistry showed positive staining for both B-cell markers. GCs were seen both within the tumor and the tumor margin, consistent with an immune response to antigen stimulation. Patients with stage I NSCLC had a higher prevalence of intratumoral GCs than patients with stages II to IV (Cochran-Armitage Trend Test p = 0.02011). There was no association of stage with GCs in the tumor margin. CONCLUSIONS: Intratumoral GCs are associated with early-stage NSCLC. Further characterization of intratumoral GCs may lead to new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies based on manipulation of the adaptive immune response.

PMID- 24852691
TI  - The immune microenvironment: a major player in human cancers.
AB  - Cancer is a major public health issue and figures among the leading causes of death in the world. Cancer development is a long process, involving the mutation, amplification or deletion of genes and chromosomal rearrangements. The transformed cells change morphologically, enlarge, become invasive and finally detach from the primary tumor to metastasize in other organs through the blood and/or lymph. During this process, the tumor cells interact with their microenvironment, which is complex and composed of stromal and immune cells that penetrate the tumor site via blood vessels and lymphoid capillaries. All subsets of immune cells can be found in tumors, but their respective density, functionality and organization vary from one type of tumor to another. Whereas inflammatory cells play a protumoral role, there is a large body of evidence of effector memory T cells controlling tumor invasion and metastasis. Thus, high densities of memory Th1/CD8 cytotoxic T cells in the primary tumors correlate with good prognosis in most tumor types. tertiary lymphoid structures, which contain mature dendritic cells (DC) in a T cell zone, proliferating B cells and follicular DC, are found in the tumor stroma and they correlate with intratumoral Th1/CD8 T cell and B cell infiltration. Eventually, tumors undergo genetic and epigenetic modifications that allow them to escape being controlled by the immune system. This comprehensive review describes the immune contexture of human primary and metastatic tumors, how it impacts on patient outcomes and how it could be used as a predictive biomarker and guide immunotherapies.

PMID- 20566898
TI  - Lymphotoxin-alpha contributes to lymphangiogenesis.
AB  - Lymphotoxin- (LT), lymphotoxin- (LT), and tumor necrosis factor- (TNF) are inflammatory mediators that play crucial roles in lymphoid organ development. We demonstrate here that LT also contributes to the function of lymphatic vessels and to lymphangiogenesis during inflammation. LT(-/-) mice exhibited reduced lymph flow velocities and increased interstitial fluid pressure. Airways of LT(-/-) mice infected with Mycoplasma pulmonis had significantly more lymphangiogenesis than wild type (WT) or LT(-/-) mice, as did the skin draining immunization sites of LT(-/-) mice. Macrophages, B cells, and T cells, known sources of LT and TNF, were apparent in the skin surrounding the immunization sites as were LT, LT, and TNF mRNAs. Ectopic expression of LT led to the development of LYVE-1 and Prox1-positive lymphatic vessels within tertiary lymphoid structure (TLOs). Quantification of pancreatic lymphatic vessel density in RIPLTLT(-/-) and WT mice revealed that LT was sufficient for inducing lymphangiogenesis and that LT was not required for this process. Kidneys of inducible LT transgenic mice developed lymphatic vessels before the appearance of obvious TLOs. These data indicate that LT plays a significant role in lymphatic vessel function and in inflammation-associated lymphangiogenesis.

PMID- 19074733
TI  - Lymphocyte-specific TRAF3 transgenic mice have enhanced humoral responses and develop plasmacytosis, autoimmunity, inflammation, and cancer.
AB  - Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) regulates both innate and adaptive immunity by modulating signaling by Toll-like receptors (TLR) and TNF receptors. TRAF3 was recently identified as a tumor suppressor in human multiple myeloma, suggesting a prominent role in plasma cell homeostasis. We have generated transgenic mice expressing human TRAF3 in lymphocytes. These mice are normal at birth, but they develop over time plasmacytosis and hypergammaglobulinemia, as well as systemic inflammation and tertiary lymphoid structure formation. The analysis of the humoral responses of the TRAF3 mice demonstrated increased responses to T-dependent and T-independent antigens with increased production of antigen-specific immunoglobulin Gs (IgGs) compared with wild-type mice. Furthermore, TLR-mediated IgG production is also increased in TRAF3 B cells. In addition, TRAF3 mice develop autoimmunity and are predisposed to cancer, particularly squamous cell carcinomas of the tongue ( approximately 50% incidence) and salivary gland tumors. In summary, TRAF3 renders B cells hyperreactive to antigens and TLR agonists, promoting autoimmunity, inflammation, and cancer, hereby providing a new model for studying de novo carcinogenesis promoted by B cell-initiated chronic inflammation.

PMID- 25428641
TI  - Does vaccine-primed pancreatic cancer offer better candidates for immune-based therapies? .tertiary lymphoid structure.

PMID- 16239393
TI  - What does tumour necrosis factor excess do to the immune system long term?
AB  - Members of the tumour necrosis factor (TNF)/TNF-receptor (TNF-R) superfamily coordinate the immune response at multiple levels. For example, TNF, LTalpha, LTbeta and RANKL provide signals required for tertiary lymphoid structure, CD27, OX-40, 4-1BB and CD30 deliver costimulatory signals to augment immune responses, while pro-apoptotic members such as TNF, CD95L and TRAIL may contribute to the termination of the response. Biological identity of individual family members has been revealed through studies of gain of function or gene deficient mutants. Most notable are the development of spontaneous inflammatory polyarthritis in human TNF-globin transgenic mice, the auto-inflammatory syndromes resulting from mutations in the 55-kDa TNF-R, and, in particular, the obligatory role for the RANKL/RANK axis in osteoclastogenesis and bone remodelling. A growing appreciation of the molecular basis of signalling pathways transduced by TNF-R has provided a framework for better understanding the biology of this expanding family. For while the rapid and robust activation of NF-kappaB and MAPK pathways is typical of acute TNF-R engagement, the molecular basis of sustained receptor signalling remains a mystery, in spite of its relevance to chronic inflammatory and immune responses. Focusing on T cells, this report describes some of the molecular footprints of sustained TNF-R engagement and illustrates how these may influence immune function. A common theme arising is that prolonged TNF stimulation alters signalling thresholds over time. The authors propose that one major outcome of long term exposure to TNF is a state of localised IL-2 deficiency at sites of inflammation. The implications of this deficiency are discussed.

PMID- 17982129
TI  - CCL21 expression pattern of human secondary lymphoid organ stroma is conserved in inflammatory lesions with tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - CCL21 is a homeostatic lymphoid chemokine instrumental in the recruitment and organization of T cells and dendritic cells into lymphoid T areas. In human secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs), CCL21 is produced by cells distributed throughout the T zone, whereas high endothelial venules (HEVs) lack CCL21 mRNA. A critical question remains whether the development of tertiary lymphoid structure (ELT) in chronic inflammation recapitulates the features of SLOs. Thus, we systematically investigated in situ the cellular sources of CCL21 in SLOs and ELTs in several human diseases characterized by tertiary lymphoid structure. By in situ hybridization and the use of combinatorial cell markers, we show that CCL21-producing vessels in inflamed tissues systematically display typical markers of lymphatic vessels, whereas, as in SLOs, ectopic HEVs do not synthesize detectable levels of CCL21. We also provide first-time evidence that a common pattern of CCL21 expression by CD45-negative myofibroblast-like cells localized in extra-HEV position and organized in a fibroblastic reticular network similarly characterizes human SLOs and organized ELTs. Altogether, our results demonstrate that in humans the pattern of CCL21 production in SLOs is maintained during inflammation and that the phenotypic and functional properties of stromal cells, found in SLO T-cell areas, are reproduced at ectopic sites.

PMID- 25177210
TI  - Characterisation and prognostic value of tertiary lymphoid structures in oral squamous cell carcinoma.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Oral squamous cell carcinomas are often heavily infiltrated by immune cells. The organization of B-cells, follicular dendritic cells, T-cells and high-endothelial venules into structures termed tertiary lymphoid structures have been detected in various types of cancer, where their presence is found to predict favourable outcome. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the incidence of tertiary lymphoid structures in oral squamous cell carcinomas, and if present, analyse whether they were associated with clinical outcome. METHODS: Tumour samples from 80 patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma were immunohistochemically stained for B-cells, follicular dendritic cells, T-cells, germinal centre B-cells and high-endothelial venules. Some samples were sectioned at multiple levels to assess whether the presence of tertiary lymphoid structures varied within the tumour. RESULTS: Tumour-associated tertiary lymphoid structures were detected in 21% of the tumours and were associated with lower disease-specific death. The presence of tertiary lymphoid structures varied within different levels of a tissue block. CONCLUSIONS: tertiary lymphoid structure formation was found to be a positive prognostic factor for patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma. Increased knowledge about tertiary lymphoid structure formation in oral squamous cell carcinoma might help to develop and guide immune-modulatory cancer treatments.

PMID- 26475096
TI  - PRDM1 expression via human parvovirus B19 infection plays a role in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto thyroiditis.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structure infiltration is a key event in Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT). Positive regulatory domain zinc finger protein 1 (PRDM1), which is induced by antigen stimulation, can regulate all lymphocyte lineages. Several groups independently demonstrated that human parvovirus B19 (PVB19) is closely associated with HT. Hence, we determined whether PRDM1 is expressed in HT thyroid tissue and whether there is any correlation between PRDM1 expression and PVB19 in the pathogenesis of HT. We detected PRDM1 expression in HT (n = 86), normal thyroid tissue (n = 30), and nontoxic nodular goiter (n = 20) samples using immunohistochemistry. We also detected PVB19 protein in HT samples in a double-blind manner and analyzed the correlation between the 2 proteins using immunofluorescence confocal detection and coimmunoprecipitation. Furthermore, we detected changes of the expression levels of PRDM1 and PVB19 in transfected primary thyroid follicular epithelial cells using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. We found that PRDM1 protein is significantly highly expressed in the injured follicular epithelial cells in HT (83/86 cases) than in normal thyroid cells (0/30 cases) or in nontoxic nodular goiter cells (0/20 cases) (P < .001). In HT, the PRDM1 expression pattern was the same as that of PVB19, whereas PRDM1 and PVB19 were coexistent in the involved epithelial cells. Statistical analysis showed a significant correlation between PRDM1 and PVB19 (P < .001). In addition, primary thyroid epithelial cells also showed PRDM1 up-regulation after PVB19 NS1 transfection. Our findings suggest a previously unrecognized role of PRDM1 and PVB19 in the pathogenesis of HT.

PMID- 24905750
TI  - B cells and tertiary lymphoid structure: novel players in anti-tumor programming with prognostic power for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.
AB  - Remarkably limited information is available about biological mechanisms that determine the disease entity of metastatic colorectal cancer in the liver (CRCLM) with no good clinical parameters to estimate prognosis. For the last few years, understanding the relationship between tumor characteristics and local immune response has gained increasing attention. Given the multifaceted roles of B-cell-driven responses, we aimed to elucidate the immunological imprint of B lymphocytes at the metastatic site, the interrelation with macrophages, and their prognostic relevance. Here we present novel algorithm allowing to assess a link between the local patient-specific immunological capacity and clinical outcome. The microscopy-based imaging platform was used for automated scanning of large-scale tissue sections and subsequent qualitative and quantitative analyses of immune cell subtypes using lineage markers and single-cell recognition strategy. Results indicate massive infiltration of CD45-positive leukocytes confined to the metastatic border. We report for the first time the accumulation of CD20-positive B lymphocytes at the tumor-liver interface comprising the major population within the large CD45-positive aggregates. Strikingly, functionally active, activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)-positive tertiary lymphoid structure were found to be assembled within the metastatic margin. Furthermore, the CD20-based data set revealed a strong prognostic power: patients with high CD20 content and/or ectopic follicles had significantly lower risk for disease recurrence as revealed by univariate analysis (p<0.001 for both) and in models adjusted for clinicopathological variables (p<0.001 and p=0.01, respectively), and showed prolonged overall survival. In contrast, CD68 staining-derived data set did not show an association with clinical outcome. Taken together, we nominate the magnitude of B lymphocytes, including those organized in ectopic follicles, as novel prognostic marker which is superior to clinicopathological parameters. Findings emphasize anti-tumoral role of B cell-driven mechanism(s) and thus indicate a new way of thinking about potential treatment strategies for CRCLM patients.

PMID- 20937314
TI  - Vaccination with dendritic cells charged with apoptotic/necrotic B16 melanoma induces the formation of subcutaneous lymphoid tissue.
AB  - Antigen presentation by dendritic cells (DC) is of key importance for the initiation of the primary immune response. Mice vaccinated with DC charged with apoptotic/necrotic B16 cells (DC-Apo/Nec) are protected against B16 challenge. The aim of this study was to assess vaccine cell migration in our system and to find out if there is an immunological response taking place at the vaccination site. The formation of a pseudocapsule, peripheral node addresin expression in small venules, and the recruitment of a wide variety of cellular populations, including macrophages, polymorphonuclear lymphocytes, and CD8+ and CD4+ T lymphocytes found in association with DC, evidenced the formation of tertiary lymphoid structure in the vaccination site in our experimental system.

PMID- 24948366
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure in infection, cancer and autoimmunity.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structure often develop at sites of inflammation where they influence the course of infection, autoimmune disease, cancer and transplant rejection. These lymphoid aggregates range from tight clusters of B cells and T cells to highly organized structures that comprise functional germinal centres. Although the mechanisms governing ectopic tertiary lymphoid structure in human pathology remain poorly defined, the presence of tertiary lymphoid structure within inflamed tissues has been linked to both protective and deleterious outcomes in patients. In this Review, we discuss investigations in both experimental model systems and patient cohorts to provide a perspective on the formation and functions of tertiary lymphoid structure in human pathology, with particular reference to the clinical implications and the potential for therapeutic targeting.

PMID- 24244900
TI  - Tumor-infiltrating follicular helper T cells: The new kids on the block.
AB  - By analyzing CD4(+) lymphocytes in human breast carcinomas, we have recently uncovered the presence of follicular helper T cells in lesions exhibiting an extensive immune infiltrate. The presence of these specialized CD4(+) T cells, which localize to the germinal centers of peritumoral tertiary lymphoid structures found in extensively infiltrated neoplastic lesions, predicts improved disease outcome among breast carcinoma patients.

PMID- 16192350
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure in chronic rejection: evidence for a local humoral alloimmune response.
AB  - Recent advances indicate that, in various chronic inflammatory disorders, the activation of the immune system is triggered locally rather than in lymphoid organs. In this study, we have evaluated whether the humoral alloimmune response involved in chronic rejection is elicited within the graft. We used the rat aortic interposition model and microdissected the adventitia of the graft. Over time, the T cell infiltrate shifted toward a B helper phenotype. B lymphocyte clusters were detected and were the site of intense proliferation and apoptosis. Simultaneously, adventitial vascular endothelium acquired a high endothelial venule phenotype. Similar features were evidenced in the interstitium of chronically allografts (hearts and kidneys). Strikingly, ganocultured graft interstitial tissue was found to be the site of production of antibodies directed against donor MHC-I molecules. These findings, therefore, document the appearance of germinal centers in chronically rejected tissues. This tertiary lymphoid structure implies that the graft is not only the target of the alloimmune response but also a site where this response actually develops, so as to optimize the communication between the targeted tissue and the immune effectors.

PMID- 23812327
TI  - The role of viruses in autoreactive B cell activation within tertiary lymphoid structures in autoimmune diseases.
AB  - TLS, characterized by the formation of ectopic B/T cell follicles with FDCs supporting an ectopic GC response, have been described in the target organs of several autoimmune diseases, including MS, RA, SS, and autoimmune thyroiditis. These structures represent functional niches, whereby autoreactive B cells undergo in situ affinity maturation and differentiation to autoantibody-producing cells, thus contributing to the progression and persistence of autoimmunity. Increasing evidence demonstrates that TLS can also develop in the context of cancer, as well as chronic infections. In this review, we collect recent evidences that highlights the relationship between persistent viral infection and the development of tertiary lymphoid structure in animal models and patients. Furthermore, we shall discuss the concept that whereas in physiological conditions, inducible TLS are critical for viral clearance and the establishment of protective immunity, but in the context of susceptible individuals, persistent viral infections may contribute, directly or indirectly, to the development of breach of tolerance against self-antigens and the development of autoimmunity through the formation of TLS.

PMID- 25688160
TI  - Orchestration and Prognostic Significance of Immune Checkpoints in the Microenvironment of Primary and Metastatic Renal Cell Cancer.
AB  - PURPOSE: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has shown durable responses to checkpoint blockade therapies. However, important gaps persist in the understanding of its immune microenvironment. This study aims to investigate the expression and prognostic significance of immune checkpoints in primary and metastatic ccRCC, in relation with mature dendritic cells (DC) and T-cell densities. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We investigated the infiltration and the localization of CD8(+) T cells and mature DC, and the expression of immune checkpoints (PD-1, LAG-3, PD-L1, and PD-L2) in relation with prognosis, in 135 primary ccRCC tumors and 51 ccRCC lung metastases. RNA expression data for 496 primary ccRCC samples were used as confirmatory cohort. RESULTS: We identify two groups of tumors with extensive CD8(+) T-cell infiltrates. One group, characterized by high expression of immune checkpoints in the absence of fully functional mature DC, is associated with increased risk of disease progression. The second group, characterized by low expression of immune checkpoints and localization of mature DC in peritumoral immune aggregates (tertiary lymphoid structures), is associated with good prognosis. CONCLUSIONS: The expression of the immune checkpoints and the localization of DC in the tumor microenvironment modulate the clinical impact of CD8(+) T cells in ccRCC.

PMID- 20962266
TI  - CD20+ B cells: the other tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes.
AB  - Tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells are strongly associated with patient survival in a wide variety of human cancers. Less is known about tumor-infiltrating CD20(+) B cells, which often colocalize with T cells, sometimes forming organized lymphoid structures. In autoimmunity and organ transplantation, T cells and B cells collaborate to generate potent, unrelenting immune responses that can result in extensive tissue damage and organ rejection. In these settings, B cells enhance T cell responses by producing Abs, stimulatory cytokines, and chemokines, serving as local APCs, and organizing the formation of tertiary lymphoid structures that sustain long-term immunity. Thus, B cells are an important component of immunological circuits associated with persistent, rampant tissue destruction. Engagement of tumor-reactive B cells may be an important condition for generating potent, long-term T cell responses against cancer.

PMID- 23610147
TI  - Role of BAFF in Opsoclonus-Myoclonus syndrome, a bridge between cancer and autoimmunity.
AB  - OMS is a rare paraneoplastic disorder that affects adults and children. Pediatric OMS is often associated with NB, a common, solid tumor of childhood, derived from the sympathetic nervous system. The detection of autoantibodies and lymphocytic infiltration in NB patients led to advance an autoimmune hypothesis for the pathogenesis of OMS-related NB. BAFF is a potent modulator of B cell growth and survival upon interaction with its receptors BAFF-R and BCMA. The aim of this study was to investigate mechanism(s) involved in ectopic tertiary lymphoid structure in OMS-associated NB. We investigated BAFF, BAFF-R, and BCMA expression in NB tumors associated or not with OMS. Furthermore, we evaluated BAFF expression and secretion in NB cell lines, treated or untreated with differentiating agents. Immunohistochemically, lymphocytes infiltrating NB tumors from patients, with or without OMS, expressed BAFF, BAFF-R, and BCMA, whereas neuroblasts expressed BAFF and BCMA but not BAFF-R. By flow cytometry, BAFF was found to be consistently expressed in NB cell lines. Similarly to the results obtained in tissue lesions, BCMA but not BAFF-R was detected on the surface of all NB cell lines under basal conditions. De novo synthesis of BAFF-R and up-regulation of BCMA were observed in NB cell lines upon treatment with IFN- or 13-cis retinoic acid. This study provides new insights in the mechanisms driving the neogenesis of lymphoid follicles and in the functional interactions between tumor and immune cells in OMS-associated NB. 

PMID- 24762633
TI  - Role of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) in Anti-Tumor Immunity: Potential Tumor-Induced Cytokines/Chemokines that Regulate TLS Formation in Epithelial-Derived Cancers.
AB  - Following the successes of monoclonal antibody immunotherapies (trastuzumab (Herceptin) and rituximab (Rituxan)) and the first approved cancer vaccine, Provenge (sipuleucel-T), investigations into the immune system and how it can be modified by a tumor has become an exciting and promising new field of cancer research. Dozens of clinical trials for new antibodies, cancer and adjuvant vaccines, and autologous T and dendritic cell transfers are ongoing in hopes of identifying ways to re-awaken the immune system and force an anti-tumor response. To date, however, few consistent, reproducible, or clinically-relevant effects have been shown using vaccine or autologous cell transfers due in part to the fact that the immunosuppressive mechanisms of the tumor have not been overcome. Much of the research focus has been on re-activating or priming cytotoxic T cells to recognize tumor, in some cases completely disregarding the potential roles that B cells play in immune surveillance or how a solid tumor should be treated to maximize immunogenicity. Here, we will summarize what is currently known about the induction or evasion of humoral immunity via tumor-induced cytokine/chemokine expression and how formation of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) within the tumor microenvironment may be used to enhance immunotherapy response.

PMID- 19946335
TI  - Immune infiltration in human tumors: a prognostic factor that should not be ignored.
AB  - The natural history of a tumor includes phases of 'in situ' growth, invasion, extravasation and metastasis. During these phases, tumor cells interact with their microenvironment and are influenced by signals coming from stromal, endothelial, inflammatory and immune cells. Indeed, tumors are often infiltrated by various numbers of lymphocytes, macrophages or mast cells. It is generally believed that the latter produce factors that maintain chronic inflammation and promote tumor growth, whereas lymphocytes may control cancer outcome, as evidenced in mouse models. In this study, we analyze data from large cohorts of human tumors, clearly establishing that infiltration of the primary tumor by memory T cells, particularly of the Th1 and cytotoxic types, is the strongest prognostic factor in terms of freedom from disease and overall survival at all stages of clinical disease. We review data suggesting that tertiary lymphoid structures adjacent to tumors and composed of mature dendritic cells (T and B cells organized as germinal centers) may be the site of an antitumor reaction. We propose an immune scoring based on the type, density and location of lymphocyte infiltrates as a novel prognostic factor for use in addition to tumor node metastasis staging to predict disease-free survival and to aid in decisions regarding adjuvant therapies in early stage human cancers.

PMID- 26155419
TI  - Understanding high endothelial venules: Lessons for cancer immunology.tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - High endothelial venules (HEVs) are blood vessels especially adapted for lymphocyte trafficking which are normally found in secondary lymphoid organs such as lymph nodes (LN) and Peyer's patches. It has long been known that HEVs develop in non-lymphoid organs during chronic inflammation driven by autoimmunity, infection or allografts. More recently, HEVs have been observed in solid, vascularized tumors and their presence correlated with reduced tumor size and improved patient outcome. It is proposed that newly formed HEV promote antitumor immunity by recruiting naive lymphocytes into the tumor, thus allowing the local generation of cancerous tissue-destroying lymphocytes. Understanding how HEVs develop and function are therefore important to unravel their role in human cancers. In LN, HEVs develop during embryonic and early post-natal life and are actively maintained by the LN microenvironment. Systemic blockade of lymphotoxin- receptor leads to HEV de-differentiation, but the LN components that induce HEV differentiation have remained elusive. Recent elegant studies using gene-targeted mice have demonstrated clearly that triggering the lymphotoxin- receptor in endothelial cells (EC) induces the differentiation of HEV and that CD11c(+) dendritic cells play a crucial role in this process. It will be important to determine whether lymphotoxin- receptor-dependent signaling in EC drives the development of HEV during tumorigenesis and which cells have HEV-inducer properties. This may reveal therapeutic approaches to promote HEV neogenesis and determine the impact of newly formed HEV on tumor immunity.

PMID- 24348473
TI  - Therapeutic use of dendritic cells to promote the extranodal priming of anti-tumor immunity.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structure, also known as tertiary lymphoid structure (TLO) develop adaptively within sites of chronic tissue inflammation, thereby allowing the host to efficiently crossprime specific immune effector cells within sites of disease. Recent evidence suggests that the presence of TLO in the tumor microenvironment (TME) predicts better overall survival. We will discuss the relevance of extranodal T cell priming within the TME as a means to effectively promote anti-tumor immunity and the strategic use of dendritic cell (DC)-based therapies to reinforce this clinically preferred process in the cancer-bearing host.

PMID- 23651195
TI  - Ongoing adaptive immune responses in the microenvironment of melanoma metastases.
AB  - A large body of evidence supports the idea that the tumor environment is immunosuppressive, notably for T lymphocytes. Yet, in some tumor types, the presence of tumor-infiltrating T cells has favorable prognostic value. In order to better understand the functional value of T cells in human tumors, we focused on cutaneous metastases of melanoma and observed that some of them host tertiary lymphoid structure in which B cell, and possibly T cell, responses take place. This observation is discussed in the context of current views on immunosuppression in tumors.

PMID- 19129256
TI  - TGF-beta upregulation drives tertiary lymphoid structure formation and kidney dysfunction in calcineurin A-alpha heterozygous mice.
AB  - Calcineurin is an important intracellular signaling molecule which can be inhibited by cyclosporin resulting in immune suppression and nephrotoxicity. Previously, we reported that homozygous loss of the alpha isoform of calcineurin impairs kidney development and function and mimics many features of cyclosporin nephrotoxicity. However, early lethality of null mice prevented further study of renal changes. Alternatively, we examined aged heterozygous (CnAalpha(+/-)) mice. In addition to renal dysfunction and inflammation, we find that CnAalpha(+/-) mice spontaneously develop tertiary lymphoid structure in the kidney, small intestine, liver, and lung. Lymphoid aggregates contain both T cells and B cells and exhibited organization suggestive of tertiary lymphoid structure (TLOs). Kidney function and TLO formation were highly correlated suggesting that this process may contribute to nephrotoxicity. Consistent with previous findings, transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta is significantly increased in CnAalpha(+/-) mice. Neutralization of TGF-beta attenuated TLO formation and improved kidney function. In conclusion, we report that haploinsufficiency of CnAalpha causes uregulation of TGF-beta which contributes to chronic inflammation and formation of TLOs. While the process that leads to TLOs formation in transplant allografts is unknown, TLOs are associated with poor clinical prognosis. This study suggests that calcineurin inhibition itself may lead to TLO formation and that TGF-beta may be a novel therapeutic target.

PMID- 26185313
TI  - Prognostic Significance of Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes and the tertiary lymphoid structures in HER2-Positive Breast Cancer Treated With Adjuvant Trastuzumab.
AB  - OBJECTIVES: Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) have prognostic significance in breast cancer. The tertiary lymphoid structure (TLS) is related to the influx of TILs, and expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I in tumor cells is necessary for the effective action of TILs. METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated the relationship of TILs and TLS and the expression of MHC I in 447 HER2-positive breast cancers treated with chemotherapy and 1 year of trastuzumab. RESULTS: TILs were more abundant in hormone receptor (HR)-/HER2+ tumors than in HR+/HER2+ tumors. HR-/HER2+ breast cancers with abundant TILs showed a higher histologic grade, the absence of lymphovascular invasion, the presence of peritumoral lymphocytic infiltration, moderate to abundant TLSs in adjacent tissue, and stronger HLA-ABC and HLA-A expression. Abundant TILs and the absence of lymphovascular invasion were found to be good, independent prognostic factors for disease-free survival in patients with HR-/HER2+ breast cancer. The level of TILs was not associated with the patients' prognosis in HR+ tumors. CONCLUSIONS: Abundant TILs are an independent prognostic factor in HR-/HER2+ breast cancers. Evaluation of TILs in HR-/HER2+ breast cancers may provide valuable information regarding the prognosis of patients treated using adjuvant chemotherapy and trastuzumab.

PMID- 24684357
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structures target the antitumor immune response to lung cancer.

PMID- 24829607
TI  - Ageing combines CD4 T cell lymphopenia in secondary lymphoid organs and T cell accumulation in gut associated lymphoid tissue.
AB  - BACKGROUND: CD4 T cell lymphopenia is an important T cell defect associated to ageing. Higher susceptibility to infections, cancer, or autoimmune pathologies described in aged individuals is thought to partly rely on T cell lymphopenia. We hypothesize that such diverse effects may reflect anatomical heterogeneity of age related T cell lymphopenia. Indeed, no data are currently available on the impact of ageing on T cell pool recovered from gut associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), a crucial site of CD4 T cell accumulation. RESULTS: Primary, secondary and tertiary lymphoid structure of C57BL/6 animals were analysed at three intervals of ages: 2 to 6months (young), 10 to 14months (middle-aged) and 22 to 26months (old). We confirmed that ageing preferentially impacted CD4 T cell compartment in secondary lymphoid organs. Importantly, a different picture emerged from gut associated mucosal sites: during ageing, CD4 T cell accumulation was progressively developing in colon and small intestine lamina propria and Peyer's patches. Similar trend was also observed in middle-aged SJL/B6 F1 mice. Interestingly, an inverse correlation was detected between CD4 T cell numbers in secondary lymphoid organs and colonic lamina propria of C57BL/6 mice whereas no increase in proliferation rate of GALT CD4 T cells was detected. In contrast to GALT, no CD4 T cell accumulation was detected in lungs and liver in middle-aged animals. Finally, the concomitant accumulation of CD4 T cell in GALT and depletion in secondary lymphoid organs during ageing was detected both in male and female animals. CONCLUSIONS: Our data thus demonstrate that T cell lymphopenia in secondary lymphoid organs currently associated to ageing is not sustained in gut or lung mucosa associated lymphoid tissues or non-lymphoid sites such as the liver. The inverse correlation between CD4 T cell numbers in secondary lymphoid organs and colonic lamina propria and the absence of overt proliferation in GALT suggest that marked CD4 T cell decay in secondary lymphoid organs during ageing reflect redistribution of CD4 T cells rather than generalized CD4 T cell decay. Such anatomical heterogeneity may provide an important rationale for the diversity of immune defects observed during ageing.

PMID- 21900403
TI  - Characterization of chemokines and adhesion molecules associated with T cell presence in tertiary lymphoid structures in human lung cancer.
AB  - De novo formation of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) has been described in lung cancers. Intratumoral TLS seem to be functional and are associated with a long-term survival for lung cancer patients, suggesting that they represent an activation site for tumor-specific T cells. Here, we characterized T-cell recruitment to TLS in human lung cancer to identify the adhesion molecules and chemoattractants orchestrating this migration. We found that most TLS T cells were CD62L+ and mainly of CD4+ memory phenotype, but naive T cells were highly enriched in these structures as compared with the rest of the tumor. A specific gene expression signature associated with T cell presence was identified in TLS, which included chemokines (CCL19, CCL21, CXCL13, CCL17, CCL22, and IL16), adhesion molecules (ICAM-2, ICAM-3, VCAM-1, and MAdCAM-1) and integrins (alphaL, alpha4, and alphaD). The presence of the corresponding receptors on TLS T cells was confirmed. Intratumoral PNAd+ high endothelial venules also were exclusively associated with TLS and colocalized with CD62L+ lymphocytes. Together, these data bring new insights into the T-cell recruitment to intratumoral TLS and suggest that blood T cell enter into TLS via high endothelial venules, which represent a new gateway for T cells to the tumor. Findings identify the molecules that mediate migration of tumor-specific T cells into TLS where T cell priming occurs, suggesting new strategies to enhance the efficacy of cancer immunotherapies.

PMID- 25901857
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure in the tumor microenvironment: from its occurrence to immunotherapeutic implications.
AB  - Recruitment of immune and inflammatory cells in the microenvironment of solid tumors is highly heterogeneous and follows patterns, varying according to the organ of origin and stage of disease, with critical roles in the process of cancer onset and progression. While adaptive cells are endowed with anti-tumor activities, inflammatory components of the immune infiltrate orchestrate an immunosuppressive microenvironment that reveals ambivalent functions of the immune contexture in the tumor milieu. The balance between opposing pro-tumoral and anti-tumoral immune pathways, which occur concomitantly in the tumor microenvironment, and the regulatory networks of these phenomena have been the target of several immunotherapeutic strategies. While the scarcity of adaptive immune effectors in tumors correlates with dismal prognosis, the pathways of activation of tumor-specific lymphocytes are yet to be fully elucidated. Recently, the occurrence of tertiary lymphoid structure was revealed to be critical in mediating the dynamics of T cell recruitment and local activation of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment. Thus, tertiary lymphoid structure assessment and targeting emerge as a promising approach for the design of novel prognostic immune signatures and immunotherapeutic strategies. The immunological behavior of tertiary lymphoid structure, its occurrence in the tumor immune microenvironment and its clinical relevance are discussed here.

PMID- 17360402
TI  - Lymphotoxin beta receptor signaling is required for inflammatory lymphangiogenesis in the thyroid.
AB  - Infiltration of lymphocytes into the thyroid gland and formation of tertiary lymphoid structure is a hallmark of Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Here we demonstrate that lymphatic vessels are present within these infiltrates. Mice overexpressing the chemokine CCL21 in the thyroid (TGCCL21 mice) developed similar lymphoid infiltrates and lymphatic vessels. TGCCL21 mice lacking mature T and B cells (RAGTGCCL21 mice) did not have cellular infiltrates or increased number of lymphatic vessels compared with controls. Transfer of CD3(+)CD4(+) T cells into RAGTGCCL21 mice promoted the development of LYVE-1(+)podoplanin(+)Prox-1(+) vessels in the thyroid. Genetic deletion of lymphotoxin beta receptor or lymphotoxin alpha abrogated development of lymphatic vessels in the inflamed areas in the thyroid but did not affect development of neighboring lymphatics. These results define a model for the study of inflammatory lymphangiogenesis in the thyroid and implicate lymphotoxin beta receptor signaling in this process.

PMID- 26341400
TI  - Regulatory T Cells in Tumor-Associated tertiary lymphoid structures Suppress Anti-tumor T Cell Responses.
AB  - Infiltration of regulatory T (Treg) cells into many tumor types correlates with poor patient prognoses. However, mechanisms of intratumoral Treg cell function remain to be elucidated. We investigated Treg cell function in a genetically engineered mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma and found that Treg cells suppressed anti-tumor responses in tumor-associated tertiary lymphoid structures (TA-TLSs). TA-TLSs have been described in human lung cancers, but their function remains to be determined. TLSs in this model were spatially associated with >90% of tumors and facilitated interactions between Tcells and tumor-antigen-presenting dendritic cells (DCs). Costimulatory ligand expression by DCs and Tcell proliferation rates increased in TA-TLSs upon Treg cell depletion, leading to tumor destruction. Thus, we propose that Treg cells in TA-TLSs can inhibit endogenous immune responses against tumors, and targeting these cells might provide therapeutic benefit for cancer patients.

PMID- 20130062
TI  - Pathogenesis of a model gammaherpesvirus in a natural host.
AB  - Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV-68) infection of laboratory mice (Mus musculus) is an established model of gammaherpesvirus pathogenesis. The fact that M. musculus is not a host in the wild prompted us to reassess MHV-68 infection in wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus), a natural host. Here, we report significant differences in MHV-68 infection in the two species: (i) following intranasal inoculation, MHV-68 replicated in the lungs of wood mice to levels approximately 3 log units lower than in BALB/c mice; (ii) in BALB/c mice, virus replication in alveolar epithelial cells was accompanied by a diffuse, T-cell-dominated interstitial pneumonitis, whereas in wood mice it was restricted to focal granulomatous infiltrations; (iii) within wood mice, latently infected lymphocytes were abundant in tertiary lymphoid structure that was not apparent in BALB/c mice; (iv) splenic latency was established in both species, but well-delineated secondary follicles with germinal centers were present in wood mice, while only poorly delineated follicles were seen in BALB/c mice; and, perhaps as a consequence, (v) production of neutralizing antibody was significantly higher in wood mice. These differences highlight the value of this animal model in the study of MHV-68 pathogenesis.

PMID- 19940063
TI  - Characterization of a novel wood mouse virus related to murid herpesvirus 4.
AB  - Two novel gammaherpesviruses were isolated, one from a field vole (Microtus agrestis) and the other from wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus). The genome of the latter, designated wood mouse herpesvirus (WMHV), was completely sequenced. WMHV had the same genome structure and predicted gene content as murid herpesvirus 4 (MuHV4; murine gammaherpesvirus 68). Overall nucleotide sequence identity between WMHV and MuHV4 was 85 % and most of the 10 kb region at the left end of the unique region was particularly highly conserved, especially the viral tRNA-like sequences and the coding regions of genes M1 and M4. The partial sequence (71 913 bp) of another gammaherpesvirus, Brest herpesvirus (BRHV), which was isolated ostensibly from a white-toothed shrew (Crocidura russula), was also determined. The BRHV sequence was 99.2 % identical to the corresponding portion of the WMHV genome. Thus, WMHV and BRHV appeared to be strains of a new virus species. Biological characterization of WMHV indicated that it grew with similar kinetics to MuHV4 in cell culture. The pathogenesis of WMHV in wood mice was also extremely similar to that of MuHV4, except for the absence of tertiary lymphoid structure at day 14 post-infection and a higher load of latently infected cells at 21 days post-infection.

PMID- 22850419
TI  - Neogenesis of lymphoid structures and antibody responses occur in human melanoma metastases.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structure, or the development of lymphoid structures in nonlymphoid organs, is frequently observed in chronically inflamed tissues, during the course of autoimmune, infectious, and chronic graft rejection diseases, in which a sustained lymphocyte activation occurs in the presence of persistent antigenic stimuli. The presence of such tertiary lymphoid structure has also been reported in primary lung, breast, and germline cancers, but not yet in melanoma. In this study, we observed tertiary lymphoid structure, defined as lymphoid follicles comprising clusters of B lymphocytes and follicular dendritic cells (DC), associated with high endothelial venules (HEV) and clusters of T cells and mature DCs, in 7 of 29 cutaneous metastases from melanoma patients. Some follicles contained germinal centers. In contrast to metastatic lesions, primary melanomas did not host follicles, but many contained HEVs, suggesting an incomplete tertiary lymphoid structure. Analysis of the repertoire of rearranged immunoglobulin genes in the B cells of microdissected follicles revealed clonal amplification, somatic mutation and isotype switching, indicating a local antigen-driven B-cell response. Surprisingly, IgA responses were observed despite the nonmucosal location of the follicles. Taken together, our findings show the existence of tertiary lymphoid structure in melanoma and suggest that the presence of functional tertiary lymphoid structure in direct contact with the tumor makes the local development of antimelanoma B- and T-cell responses possible.

PMID- 25548922
TI  - Inflammatory micro-environmental cues of human atherothrombotic arteries confer to vascular smooth muscle cells the capacity to trigger tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - BACKGROUND: Experimental atherosclerosis is characterized by the formation of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLOs) within the adventitial layer, which involves the chemokine-expressing aortic smooth muscle cells (SMCs). TLOs have also been described around human atherothrombotic arteries but the mechanisms of their formation remain poorly investigated. Herein, we tested whether human vascular SMCs play the role of chemokine-expressing cells that would trigger the formation of TLOs in atherothrombotic arteries. RESULTS: We first characterized, by flow cytometry and immunofluorescence analysis, the prevalence and cell composition of TLOs in human abdominal aneurysms of the aorta (AAAs), an evolutive form of atherothrombosis. Chemotaxis experiments revealed that the conditioned medium from AAA tissues recruited significantly more B and T lymphocytes than the conditioned medium from control (N-AAA) tissues. This was associated with an increase in the concentration of CXCL13, CXCL16, CCL19, CCL20, and CCL21 chemokines in the conditioned medium from AAA tissues. Immunofluorescence analysis of AAA cryosections revealed that -SMA-positive SMCs were the main contributors to the chemokine production. These results were confirmed by RT-qPCR assays where we found that primary vascular SMCs from AAA tissues expressed significantly more chemokines than SMCs from N-AAA. Finally, in vitro experiments demonstrated that the inflammatory cytokines found to be increased in the conditioned medium from AAA were able to trigger the production of chemokines by primary SMCs. CONCLUSION: Together, these results suggest that human vascular SMCs in atherothrombotic arteries, in response to inflammatory signals, are converted into chemokine-expressing cells that trigger the recruitment of immune cells and the formation of aortic TLOs.

PMID- 23097687
TI  - 12-Chemokine gene signature identifies tertiary lymphoid structure in melanoma: potential for patient selection for immunotherapy?
AB  - We have interrogated a 12-chemokine gene expression signature (GES) on genomic arrays of 14,492 distinct solid tumors and show broad distribution across different histologies. We hypothesized that this 12-chemokine GES might accurately predict a unique intratumoral immune reaction in stage IV (non-locoregional) melanoma metastases. The 12-chemokine GES predicted the presence of unique, tertiary lymphoid structure, containing CD20 B cell follicles with prominent areas of CD3 T cells (both CD4 and CD8 subsets). CD86, but not FoxP3, cells were present within these unique structures as well. The direct correlation between the 12-chemokine GES score and the presence of unique, tertiary lymphoid structure was also associated with better overall survival of the subset of melanoma patients. The use of this novel 12-chemokine GES may reveal basic information on in situ mechanisms of the anti-tumor immune response, potentially leading to improvements in the identification and selection of melanoma patients most suitable for immunotherapy.

PMID- 23602049
TI  - The role of inflammatory chemokines in lymphoid neoorganogenesis in breast cancer.
AB  - The expression profiling analysis of inflammatory chemokines and their receptors in newly formed lymph nodes in breast cancer was carried out. The analysis revealed the increase in expression of the genes CCL16, XCR1, CYFIP2, TNFSF14 and the reduction in expression of chemokine ligands CXCL5 and CXCL12 in tertiary lymphoid structure. The obtained results allow us to suggest that the process of induction of lymph nodes neogenesis is identical (in its key mechanisms) to the process of lymphoid tissue neogenesis in autoimmune diseases and in some infections, but may have different triggers.

PMID- 24213222
TI  - Tertiary intratumor lymphoid tissue in colo-rectal cancer.
AB  - Ectopic (or tertiary) lymphoid tissue develops at sites of inflammation or infection in non lymphoid organs and is associated with chronic inflammation. In colon mucosa, small lymphoid aggregates are already present in homeostatic conditions, as part of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue and play an essential role in the immune response to perturbations of the mucosal microenvironment. Despite the recognized role of inflammation in tumor progression, the presence and biological function of lymphoid tissue in cancer has been poorly investigated. We identified aggregates of lymphocytes resembling tertiary lymphoid structure in human colorectal cancer specimens; intratumor accumulations of lymphocytes display a high degree of compartmentalization, with B and T cells, mature dendritic cells and a network of CD21+ follicular dendritic cells (FDC). We analyzed the adaptation of colon lymphoid tissue in a murine model of colitis-associated cancer (AOM/DSS). B cell follicle formation increases in the context of the chronic inflammation associated to intestinal neoplasia, in this model. A network of lymphatic and haematic vessels surrounding B cell follicles is present and includes high endothelial venules (HEV). Future task is to determine whether lymphoid tissue contributes to the persistence of the tumor-associated inflammatory reaction, rather than represent a functional immune compartment, potentially participating to the anti tumor response. 

PMID- 20574003
TI  - CXCL13 blockade disrupts B lymphocyte organization in tertiary lymphoid structures without altering B cell receptor bias or preventing diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice.
AB  - Lymphocytes that invade nonlymphoid tissues often organize into follicle-like structures known as tertiary lymphoid structure (TLOs). These structures resemble those found in spleen or lymph nodes, but their function is unknown. TLOs are recognized in many autoimmune diseases, including the NOD mouse model of type 1 diabetes. In some cases, TLOs have been associated with the B lymphocyte chemoattractant, CXCL13. Studies presented in this article show that CXCL13 is present in inflamed islets of NOD mice. Ab blockade of this chemokine unraveled B lymphocyte organization in islet TLOs, without reducing their proportion in the islets. These chaotic milieus contained B lymphocytes with the same distinct repertoire of B cell receptors as those found in mice with well-organized structures. Somatic hypermutation, associated with T-B interactions, was not impaired in these disorganized insulitis lesions. Finally, loss of B lymphocyte organization in islets did not provide disease protection. Thus, B lymphocytes infiltrating islets in NOD mice do not require the morphology of secondary lymphoid tissues to support their role in disease.

PMID- 22177922
TI  - Th17 cells induce tertiary lymphoid structure in central nervous system tissue inflammation.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structure are hallmarks of chronic autoimmune inflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS), rheumatoid arthritis, Sjgren's syndrome, and myasthenia gravis. However, the effector cells and mechanisms that induce their development are unknown. Here we showed that in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of MS, Th17 cells specifically induced tertiary lymphoid structure in the central nervous system (CNS). Development of tertiary lymphoid structure was partly dependent on the cytokine interleukin 17 (IL-17) and on the cell surface molecule Podoplanin (Pdp), which was expressed on Th17 cells, but not on other effector T cell subsets. Pdp was also crucial for the development of secondary lymphoid structures: Pdp-deficient mice lacked peripheral lymph nodes and had a defect in forming normal lymphoid follicles and germinal centers in spleen and lymph node remnants. Thus, Th17 cells are uniquely endowed to induce tissue inflammation, characterized by tertiary lymphoid structure within the target organ.

PMID- 22179673
TI  - IL-17 initiates tertiary lymphoid structure formation.

PMID- 17143328
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure (iBALT) in patients with pulmonary complications of rheumatoid arthritis.
AB  - Bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) was originally described as a mucosal lymphoid organ in the lungs of some species. However, while the lungs of naive mice and humans typically lack BALT, pulmonary infection in mice leads to the development of inducible BALT (iBALT), which is located in peribronchial, perivascular, and interstitial areas throughout the lung. Here we investigated whether iBALT forms in patients with a variety of interstitial lung diseases. We show that while iBALT can be found in the lungs of patients suffering from multiple diseases, well-developed iBALT is most prevalent in patients with pulmonary complications of RA and Sjgren syndrome. In these patients, iBALT consisted of numerous B cell follicles containing germinal centers and follicular dendritic cells. A loosely defined T cell area surrounded the B cell follicles while lymphatics and high endothelial venules were found at the B cell/T cell interface. Increased expression of lymphoid-organizing chemokines, such as CXCL13 and CCL21, as well as molecules involved in the immunopathology of RA, such as B cell-activating factor of the TNF family (BAFF), ICOS ligand, and lymphotoxin, correlated with more well-developed iBALT. Finally, the presence of iBALT correlated with tissue damage in the lungs of RA patients, suggesting that iBALT participates in local RA pathogenesis.

PMID- 24590281
TI  - Lymphatic vessels and tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structure (TLOs) are accumulations of lymphoid cells in chronic inflammation that resemble LNs in their cellular content and organization, high endothelial venules, and lymphatic vessels (LVs). Although acute inflammation can result in defective LVs, TLO LVs appear to function normally in that they drain fluid and transport cells that respond to chemokines and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) gradients. Molecular regulation of TLO LVs differs from lymphangiogenesis in ontogeny with a dependence on cytokines and hematopoietic cells. Ongoing work to elucidate the function and molecular regulation of LVs in TLOs is providing insight into therapies for conditions as diverse as lymphedema, autoimmunity, and cancer.

PMID- 26216636
TI  - Control of CD8 T-Cell Infiltration into Tumors by Vasculature and Microenvironment.tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - CD8 T-cells are a critical brake on the initial development of tumors. In established tumors, the presence of CD8 T-cells is correlated with a positive patient prognosis, although immunosuppressive mechanisms limit their effectiveness and they are rarely curative without manipulation. Cancer immunotherapies aim to shift the balance back to dominant antitumor immunity through antibody blockade of immunosuppressive signaling pathways, vaccination, and adoptive transfer of activated or engineered T-cells. These approaches have yielded striking responses in small subsets of patients with solid tumors, most notably those with melanoma. Importantly, the subset of patients who respond to vaccination or immunosuppression blockade therapies are those with CD8 T-cells present in the tumor prior to initiating therapy. While current adoptive cell therapy approaches can be dramatically effective, they require infusion of extremely large numbers of T-cells, but the number that actually infiltrates the tumor is very small. Thus, poor representation of CD8 T-cells in tumors is a fundamental hurdle to successful immunotherapy, over and above the well-established barrier of immunosuppression. In this review, we discuss the factors that determine whether immune cells are present in tumors, with a focus on the representation of cytotoxic CD8 T-cells. We emphasize the critically important role of tumor-associated vasculature as a gateway that enables the active infiltration of both effector and nave CD8 T-cells that exert antitumor activity. We also discuss strategies to enhance the gateway function and extend the effectiveness of immunotherapies to a broader set of cancer patients.

PMID- 20512556
TI  - Immune infiltration in human cancer: prognostic significance and disease control.
AB  - The interplay between tumors and their immunologic microenvironment is complex and difficult to decipher, but its understanding is of seminal importance for the development of novel prognostic markers and therapeutic strategies. This chapter discusses tumor-immune interactions in several human cancers that illustrate various aspects of this complexity and proposes an integrated scheme of the impact of local immune reactions on clinical outcome. Thus, the fact that a strong infiltration of memory T cells with a Th1 and cytotoxic pattern is the strongest predictor for recurrence and metastasis is exemplified in colorectal cancer in which intratumoral chemokines shape an efficient immune reaction. Based on these data, we propose an immune score that predicts recurrence in early stage (UICC-TNM stage I-II) cancers. Studies on non-small lung cancers have confirmed findings of colorectal cancers and have addressed the question of the sites where antitumor immune reactions may take place. tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) adjacent to the tumor nest are sites of intense activity with mature dendritic cells in contact with T cells and germinal-like centers with proliferating B cells. The large number of these TLS being correlated with disease specific and overall survival tempts to postulate that they are privileged sites to mount an efficient antitumor reaction. Inflammation is a major component of human tumors and chronic inflammation is generally of bad prognosis. Head and neck cancers are highly inflammatory and two ways to modulate inflammation in these diseases are presented here: soluble IL-15 receptor  (IL-15 R) increases the pro-inflammatory effect of IL-15 and aggravates inflammation resulting in poor prognosis when found at high levels in the plasma of patients. By contrast, infiltration of regulatory T cells is paradoxically beneficial for local control of head and neck tumors, probably by "cooling down" the inflammatory process. The modulation of other aspects of innate immunity may also result in paradoxical effects such as the signaling through Toll like receptors 7 and 8 expressed on lung tumor cells which induce an aggressive tumoral phenotype. Finally, the analysis of primary intraocular lymphoma, which develops in the eye, exemplifies the induction of an antitumor immune reaction in an "immune sanctuary," presenting all the complexities of the tumor-immune interplay in "open" tissues such as the colon or the lung.

PMID- 25112529
TI  - Shaping of an effective immune microenvironment to and by cancer cells.
AB  - A high density of intratumoral effector memory CD8+/Th1 T cells is associated with favorable prognosis in most cancers and may be induced or increased by immunotherapy. Efficient adaptive immune reactions are shaped in tumor adjacent tertiary lymphoid structures, which exhibit all characteristics of immunity generating lymphoid formations in reactive lymph nodes. Malignant tumor cells impact favorably or deleteriously their immune microenvironment if they bear genetic mutations that result in neo-antigens or by producing chemokines and cytokines that recruit lymphocytes and myeloid cells or increase inflammation and neo-angiogenesis. This intricate network of interactions results in control or escape of tumors, and its understanding will help define goals to monitor efficiency of immunotherapies.

PMID- 19302038
TI  - Immune and inflammatory mechanisms of atherosclerosis (*).
AB  - Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease of the wall of large- and medium-sized arteries that is precipitated by elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in the blood. Although dendritic cells (DCs) and lymphocytes are found in the adventitia of normal arteries, their number is greatly expanded and their distribution changed in human and mouse atherosclerotic arteries. Macrophages, DCs, foam cells, lymphocytes, and other inflammatory cells are found in the intimal atherosclerotic lesions. Beneath these lesions, adventitial leukocytes organize in clusters that resemble tertiary lymphoid structure. Experimental interventions can reduce the number of available blood monocytes, from which macrophages and most DCs and foam cells are derived, and reduce atherosclerotic lesion burden without altering blood lipids. Under proatherogenic conditions, nitric oxide production from endothelial cells is reduced and the burden of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and advanced glycation end products (AGE) is increased. Incapacitating ROS-generating NADPH oxidase or the receptor for AGE (RAGE) has beneficial effects. Targeting inflammatory adhesion molecules also reduces atherosclerosis. Conversely, removing or blocking IL-10 or TGF-beta accelerates atherosclerosis. Regulatory T cells and B1 cells secreting natural antibodies are atheroprotective. This review summarizes our current understanding of inflammatory and immune mechanisms in atherosclerosis.

PMID- 23371062
TI  - Autoreactive T and B cells induce the development of bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue in the lung.
AB  - Rheumatoid arthritis-related interstitial lung disease (RA-ILD) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Studies in humans have found that the incidence of bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) correlates with the severity of lung injury. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of BALT during systemic autoimmunity remain unknown. We have determined whether systemic autoimmunity in a murine model of autoimmune arthritis can promote the development of BALT by generating a novel murine model derived from K/BxN mice. Transgenic mice with the KRN T-cell receptor specific for the autoantigen, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), were crossed with GPI-specific immunoglobulin heavy and light chain knock-in mice, producing mice with a majority of T and B cells specific for the same autoantigen. We found that 67% of these mice demonstrated lymphocytic infiltration in the lungs, localized to either the perivascular or peribronchial regions. Fifty percent of the mice with lymphocytic infiltration manifested lymphoid-like lesions resembling BALT, with distinct T and B cell follicles. The lungs from mice with lymphoid infiltrates had increased numbers of cytokine-producing T cells, including IL-17A(+) T cells and increased major histocompatibility complex Class II expression on B cells. Interestingly, challenge with bleomycin failed to elicit a significant fibrotic response, compared with wild-type control mice. Our data suggest that systemic autoreactivity promotes tertiary lymphoid structure development in the lung through the cooperation of autoreactive T and B cells. However, these BALT-like lesions may not be sufficient to promote fibrotic lung disease at steady state or after inflammatory challenge.

PMID- 21271351
TI  - Tumor microenvironment is multifaceted.
AB  - Cancer initiation, progression, and invasion occur in a complex and dynamic microenvironment which depends on the hosts and sites where tumors develop. Tumors arising in mucosal tissues may progress in an inflammatory context linked to local viral and/or bacterial infections. At the opposite, tumors developing in immunoprivileged sites are protected from microorganisms and grow in an immunosuppressive environment. In the present review, we summarize and present our recent data on the influence of infectious context and immune cell infiltration organization in human Non-Small Cell Lung Cancers (NSCLC) progression. We show that stimulation of tumor cells by TLR for viral ssRNA, such as TLR7/8, or bacteria, such as TLR4, promotes cell survival and induces chemoresistance. On the opposite, stimulation by TLR3, receptor for double-stranded viral RNA, decreases tumor cell viability and induces chemosensitivity in some lung tumor cell lines. Since fresh lung tumor cells exhibit a gene expression profile characteristic of TLR-stimulated lung tumor cell lines, we suspect that viral and bacterial influence may not only act on the host immune system but also directly on tumor growth and sensitivity to chemotherapy. The stroma of NSCLC contains tertiary lymphoid structures (or tertiary lymphoid structure (Ti-BALT)) with mature DC, follicular DC, and T and B cells. Two subsets of immature DC, Langerhans cells (LC) and interstitial DC (intDC), were detected in the tumor nests and the stroma, respectively. Here, we show that the densities of the three DC subsets, mature DC, LC, and intDC, are highly predictive of disease-specific survival in a series of 74 early-stage NSCLC patients. We hypothesize that the mature DC may derive from local activation and migration of the immature DC--and especially LC which contact the tumor cells--to the tertiary lymphoid structures, after sampling and processing of the tumor antigens. In view of the prominent role of DC in the immune response, we suggest that the microenvironment of early-stage NSCLC may allow the in situ activation of the adaptive response. Finally, we find that the eyes or brain of mice with growing B cell lymphoma are infiltrated with T cells and that the cytokines produced ex vivo by the tumoral tissues have an impaired Th1 cytokine profile. Our work illustrates that the host and external tumor microenvironments are multifaceted and strongly influence tumor progression and anti-tumor immune responses.

PMID- 24154855
TI  - Characteristics and significance of colorectal cancer associated lymphoid reaction.tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - A subset of colorectal cancers (CRCs) exhibits so-called Crohn's like lymphoid reaction (CLR), an inflammatory reaction pattern that consists of numerous transmural lymphoid aggregates. However, the composition of these aggregates, their biological mechanisms and their prognostic significance are not well-defined. We analyzed two CRC cohorts (418 and 149 patients) and determined clinicopathological features including survival. A new method for evaluating CLR based on counting the areal density of the lymphoid follicles (CLR density) was adopted. Immune cell densities at intratumoral and peritumoral regions, as well as the composition of the lymphoid follicles, were studied by immunohistochemistry. We found that CLR comprised of lymphoid aggregates with no evidence of granuloma formation. High CLR density associated with lower tumor stage, lack of preoperative radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy and deficient mismatch repair enzyme expression. CLR density had positive correlations with peritumoral and intratumoral densities of CD83(+) mature dendritic cells and T cells. High CLR density associated with better survival and had prognostic value that was independent of stage, Klintrup-Mkinen score for peritumoral inflammation and the numbers of tumor infiltrating T cells. CLR density evaluation had excellent intraobserver and interobserver agreement. In conclusion, the results suggest that CLR contributes to the adaptive antitumor immunity. Quantitative evaluation of CLR density is a relevant prognostic indicator in CRC.

PMID- 25755654
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure-Associated B Cells are Key Players in Anti-Tumor Immunity.
AB  - It is now admitted that the immune system plays a major role in tumor control. Besides the existence of tumor-specific T cells and B cells, many studies have demonstrated that high numbers of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes are associated with good clinical outcome. In addition, not only the density but also the organization of tumor-infiltrating immune cells has been shown to determine patient survival. Indeed, more and more studies describe the development within the tumor microenvironment of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS), whose presence has a positive impact on tumor prognosis. TLS are transient ectopic lymphoid aggregates displaying the same organization and functionality as canonical secondary lymphoid organs, with T-cell-rich and B-cell-rich areas that are sites for the differentiation of effector and memory T cells and B cells. However, factors favoring the emergence of such structures within tumors still need to be fully characterized. In this review, we survey the state of the art of what is known about the general organization, induction, and functionality of TLS during chronic inflammation, and more especially in cancer, with a particular focus on the B-cell compartment. We detail the role played by TLS B cells in anti-tumor immunity, both as antigen-presenting cells and tumor antigen-specific antibody-secreting cells, and raise the question of the capacity of chemotherapeutic and immunotherapeutic agents to induce the development of TLS within tumors. Finally, we explore how to take advantage of our knowledge on TLS B cells to develop new therapeutic tools.

PMID- 17605009
TI  - Immunological tumor destruction in a murine melanoma model by targeted LTalpha independent of secondary lymphoid tissue.
AB  -  BACKGROUND: We previously demonstrated that targeting lymphotoxin alpha (LTalpha) to the tumor evokes its immunological destruction in a syngeneic B16 melanoma model. Since treatment was associated with the induction of peritumoral tertiary lymphoid structure, we speculated that the induced immune response was initiated at the tumor site. METHODS AND RESULTS: In order to directly test this notion, we analyzed the efficacy of tumor targeted LTalpha in LTalpha knock-out (LTalpha(-/-)) mice which lack peripheral lymph nodes. To this end, we demonstrate that tumor-targeted LTalpha mediates the induction of specific T-cell responses even in the absence of secondary lymphoid organs. In addition, this effect is accompanied by the initiation of tertiary lymphoid structure at the tumor site in which B and T lymphocytes are compartmentalized in defined areas and which harbor expanded numbers of tumor specific T cells as demonstrated by in situ TRP-2/K(b) tetramer staining. Mechanistically, targeted LTalpha therapy seems to induce changes at the tumor site which allows a coordinated interaction of immune competent cells triggering the induction of tertiary lymphoid structure. CONCLUSION: Thus, our data demonstrate that targeted LTalpha promotes an accelerated immune response by enabling the priming of T cells at the tumor site.

PMID- 25135832
TI  - Live simian immunodeficiency virus vaccine correlate of protection: local antibody production and concentration on the path of virus entry.
AB  - We sought design principles for a vaccine to prevent HIV transmission to women by identifying correlates of protection conferred by a highly effective live attenuated SIV vaccine in the rhesus macaque animal model. We show that SIVmac239nef vaccination recruits plasma cells and induces tertiary lymphoid structure formation beneath the mucosal epithelium in the rhesus macaque female reproductive tract. The plasma cells and ectopic follicles produce IgG Abs reactive with viral envelope glycoprotein gp41 trimers, and these Abs are concentrated on the path of virus entry by the neonatal FcR in cervical reserve epithelium and in vaginal epithelium. This local Ab production and delivery system correlated spatially and temporally with the maturation of local protection against high-dose pathogenic SIV vaginal challenge. Thus, designing vaccines to elicit production and concentration of Abs at mucosal frontlines could aid in the development of an effective vaccine to protect women against HIV-1.

PMID- 25949892
TI  - High endothelial venules are rare in colorectal cancers but accumulate in extra-tumoral areas with disease progression.tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - Prolonged patient survival after surgical resection, is associated with a higher cytotoxic and memory T cell density within colorectal cancers (CRC). High endothelial venules (HEVs) are specialized blood vessels present in secondary lymphoid organs (SLO) that allow ingress of nave and central memory T cells from the blood. It has been proposed that HEVs in tumors might serve as a similar route of entry for lymphocytes into the tumor and result in an improved prognosis. The present study aimed to characterize HEVs and their microenvironment in resected tumors from colorectal cancer patients (n = 62). We observed HEVs in association with lymphoid aggregates in 49 out of 62 patients. However, these HEV(+) lymphoid aggregates were largely at the invasive margin of the tumor and although there was an association with lymphocytes and HEVs at the invasive margin (p = 0.002) there was only a very weak association with tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. Indeed, lymphoid aggregates were associated with more advanced disease (Dukes' stage C) and did not indicate a favorable prognosis.

PMID- 21153327
TI  - Lymphotoxin's link to carcinogenesis: friend or foe? from tertiary lymphoid structure to hepatocellular carcinoma and prostate cancer.
AB  -  

PMID- 15111310
TI  - Detection of a sulfotransferase (HEC-GlcNAc6ST) in high endothelial venules of lymph nodes and in high endothelial venule-like vessels within ectopic lymphoid aggregates: relationship to the MECA-79 epitope.
AB  - The interaction of L-selectin on lymphocytes with sulfated ligands on high endothelial venules (HEVs) of lymph nodes results in lymphocyte rolling and is essential for lymphocyte homing. The MECA-79 monoclonal antibody reports HEV-expressed ligands for L-selectin by recognizing a critical sulfation-dependent determinant on these ligands. HEC-GlcNAc6ST, a HEV-localized sulfotransferase, is essential for the elaboration of functional ligands within lymph nodes, as well as the generation of the MECA-79 epitope. Here, we use an antibody against murine HEC-GlcNAc6ST to study its expression in relationship to the MECA-79 epitope. In lymph nodes, the enzyme is expressed in the Golgi apparatus of high endothelial cells, in close correspondence with luminal staining by MECA-79. In lymph node HEVs of HEC-GlcNAc6ST-null mice, luminal staining by MECA-79 is almost abolished, whereas abluminal staining persists although reduced in intensity. HEV-like vessels in several examples of inflammation-associated tertiary lymphoid structure, including nonobese diabetic mice, also exhibit concomitant expression of the sulfotransferase and luminal MECA-79 reactivity. The correlation extends to ectopic lymphoid aggregates within the pancreas of RIP-BLC mice, in which CXCL13 is expressed in islets. Analysis of the progeny of RIP-BLC by HEC-GlcNAc6ST-null mice establishes that the enzyme is responsible for the MECA-79 defined luminal ligands.

PMID- 20951645
TI  - Synthesis of artificial lymphoid tissue with immunological function.
AB  - The ability to generate functional artificial lymphoid tissue to induce specific immunity at ectopic sites could offer a potential breakthrough for treatment of diseases such as cancer and severe infection using immunotherapy. Artificial lymphoid tissue could also offer an informative tool to study further lymphoid tissue development and function in vivo. Here, we review the process of secondary and tertiary lymphoid structureization, of which an understanding is essential for artificial lymphoid tissue synthesis. Using this knowledge, we consider the combination of cell types, soluble factors and scaffold properties that will enable proper accumulation and organization of lymphocytes into tissue grafts. Recent success in in vivo induction of artificial lymphoid tissue are also considered.

PMID- 12732657
TI  - Ectopic LT alpha beta directs lymphoid organ neogenesis with concomitant expression of peripheral node addressin and a HEV-restricted sulfotransferase.
AB  - Lymph node (LN) function depends on T and B cell compartmentalization, antigen presenting cells, and high endothelial venules (HEVs) expressing mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule (MAdCAM-1) and peripheral node addressin (PNAd), ligands for naive cell entrance into LNs. Luminal PNAd expression requires a HEV-restricted sulfotransferase (HEC-6ST). To investigate LT alpha beta's activities in lymphoid organogenesis, mice simultaneously expressing LT alpha and LT beta under rat insulin promoter II (RIP) control were compared with RIPLT alpha mice in a model of tertiary lymphoid structure and with LT beta-/- mice. RIPLT alpha beta pancreata exhibited massive intra-islet mononuclear infiltrates that differed from the more sparse peri-islet cell accumulations in RIPLT alpha pancreata: separation into T and B cell areas was more distinct with prominent FDC networks, expression of lymphoid chemokines (CCL21, CCL19, and CXCL13) was more intense, and L-selectin+ cells were more frequent. In contrast to the predominant abluminal PNAd pattern of HEV in LT beta-/- MLN and RIPLT alpha pancreatic infiltrates, PNAd was expressed at the luminal and abluminal aspects of HEV in wild-type LN and in RIPLT alpha beta pancreata, coincident with HEC-6ST. These data highlight distinct roles of LT alpha and LT alpha beta in lymphoid organogenesis supporting the notion that HEC-6ST-dependent luminal PNAd is under regulation by LT alpha beta.

PMID- 20460520
TI  - Expression of LIGHT/TNFSF14 combined with vaccination against human papillomavirus Type 16 E7 induces significant tumor regression.
AB  - LIGHT, a ligand for the lymphotoxin-beta receptor, establishes tertiary lymphoid structure inside tumor sites and recruits nave T cells into the tumor. However, whether these infiltrating T cells are specific for tumor antigens is not known. We hypothesized that therapy with LIGHT can expand functional tumor-specific CD8(+) T cells that can be boosted using HPV16E6E7-Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus replicon particles (HPV16-VRP) and that this combined therapy can eradicate human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16)-induced tumors. Our data show that forced expression of LIGHT in tumors results in an increase in expression of IFNgamma and chemoattractant cytokines such as interleukin-1a, MIG, and macrophage inflammatory protein-2 within the tumor and that this tumor microenvironment correlates with an increase in frequency of tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells. Forced expression of LIGHT also results in the expansion of functional T cells that recognize multiple tumor antigens, including HPV16 E7, and these T cells prevent the outgrowth of tumors on secondary challenge. Subsequent boosting of E7-specific T cells by vaccination with HPV16-VRP significantly increases their frequency in both the periphery and the tumor and leads to the eradication of large well-established tumors, for which either treatment alone is not successful. These data establish the safety of Ad-LIGHT as a therapeutic intervention in preclinical studies and suggest that patients with HPV16(+) tumors may benefit from combined immunotherapy with LIGHT and antigen-specific vaccination.

PMID- 24754996
TI  - Persistence of pulmonary tertiary lymphoid structure and anti-nuclear antibodies following cessation of cigarette smoke exposure.
AB  - Formation of pulmonary tertiary immune structures is a characteristic feature of advanced COPD. In the current study, we investigated the mechanisms of tertiary lymphoid structure (TLT) formation in the lungs of cigarette smoke-exposed mice. We found that cigarette smoke exposure led to TLT formation that persisted following smoking cessation. TLTs consisted predominantly of IgM positive B cells, while plasma cells in close proximity to TLTs expressed IgM, IgG, and IgA. The presence of TLT formation was associated with anti-nuclear autoantibody (ANA) production that also persisted following smoking cessation. ANAs were observed in the lungs, but not the circulation of cigarette smoke-exposed mice. Similarly, we observed ANA in the sputum of COPD patients where levels correlated with disease severity and were refractory to steroid treatment. Both ANA production and TLT formation were dependent on interleukin-1 receptor 1 (IL-1R1) expression. Contrary to TLT and ANA, lung neutrophilia resolved following smoking cessation. These data suggest a differential regulation of innate and B cell-related immune inflammatory processes associated with cigarette smoke exposure. Moreover, our study further emphasizes the importance of interleukin-1 (IL-1) signaling pathways in cigarette smoke-related pulmonary pathogenesis.

PMID- 23483539
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure in melanoma: What does it tell us?
AB  - Metastatic melanoma lesions sometimes host tertiary lymphoid structure exhibiting ongoing adaptive immune responses. Here, we discuss how this finding fits in our current view of antitumor immunity.

PMID- 18980207
TI  - Abundant expression of CXCL9 (MIG) by stromal cells that include dendritic cells and accumulation of CXCR3+ T cells in lymphocyte-rich gastric carcinoma.
AB  - The neoplastic environment is generally regarded as an immunosuppressive milieu. However, a group of cancers are characterized by the abundance of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). Here we examined the possible roles of chemokines in the formation of lymphoid stroma in lymphocyte-rich gastric carcinomas (GCs), including EBV(+) cases and conventional GCs. Regardless of EBV positivity, TILs in lymphocyte-rich GCs predominantly expressed CXCR3, while its ligand CXCL9 was abundantly expressed by stromal cells and a portion of cancer cells. CXCL9(+) stromal cells were judged to include dendritic cells, because they partly co-expressed fascin, DC-sign, CD83, DC-lamp or HLA-DR. T cells in close contact with CXCL9(+) cells showed frequent labelling of Ki-67 (approximately 10%), suggesting the immunostimulatory activity of CXCL9(+) stromal cells. The T-cell zone of the regional lymph nodes of lymphocyte-rich GCs also abounded with CXCR3(+) T cells and CXCL9(+) stromal cells. This indicated a close similarity between cancer stroma and regional lymph nodes of lymphocyte-rich GCs. Quantitative RT-PCR also confirmed the strong expression of CXCR3, CXCL9 and IFNgamma in lymphocyte-rich GCs. In contrast, conventional GCs contained less abundant CXCR3(+) T cells and few CXCL9(+) stromal cells. Collectively, the CXCL9-CXCR3 axis plays a pivotal role in the formation of lymphoid stroma in lymphocyte-rich GCs. Given similar findings in the regional lymph nodes, the lymphoid stroma of lymphocyte-rich GCs may represent a tertiary lymphoid structure with predominantly Th1-shifted immune responses.

PMID- 26515728
TI  - TGF- blockade depletes T regulatory cells from metastatic pancreatic tumors in a vaccine dependent manner.
AB  - Our neoadjuvant clinical trial of a GM-CSF secreting allogeneic pancreas tumor vaccine (GVAX) revealed the development of tertiary lymphoid structure (TLAs) within the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) tumor microenvironment 2 weeks after GVAX treatment. Microarray studies revealed that multiple components of the TGF- pathway were suppressed in TLAs from patients who survived greater than 3 years and who demonstrated vaccine-enhanced mesothelin-specific T cell responses. We tested the hypothesis that combining GVAX with TGF- inhibitors will improve the anti-tumor immune response of vaccine therapy. In a metastatic murine model of pancreatic cancer, combination therapy with GVAX vaccine and a TGF- blocking antibody improved the cure rate of PDA-bearing mice. TGF- blockade in combination with GVAX significantly increased the infiltration of effector CD8+ T lymphocytes, specifically anti-tumor-specific IFN-f producing CD8+ T cells, when compared to monotherapy controls (all p < 0.05). TGF- blockade alone did not deplete T regulatory cells (Tregs), but when give in combination with GVAX, GVAX induced intratumoral Tregs were depleted. Therefore, our PDA preclinical model demonstrates a survival advantage in mice treated with an anti-TGF- antibody combined with GVAX therapy and provides strong rational for testing this combinational therapy in clinical trials.

PMID- 23264915
TI  - Tumor-infiltrating B cells and T cells: Working together to promote patient survival.
AB  - We recently reported a novel cooperative relationship between tumor-infiltrating B cells and CD8(+) T cells in ovarian cancer, leading to increased patient survival. Here, we discuss the mechanisms whereby B cells might enhance cellular immunity, including serving as antigen-presenting cells, organizing tertiary lymphoid structures and secreting polarizing cytokines. The enhancement of both B and T-cell responses may result in more potent and sustained antitumor immunity.

PMID- 20605642
TI  - Lymphoid chemokines in the CNS.
AB  - Lymphoid chemokines, including CCL19, CCL21 and CXCL13, are critical in the development and organization of secondary lymphoid tissues and in the generation of adaptive immune responses. These molecules have also been implicated in the development of tertiary lymphoid structure in the setting of chronic inflammation. Here we review current knowledge on the production of lymphoid chemokines in the central nervous system during both homeostatic conditions and in disease states. Accumulating evidence suggests that constitutive expression of CCL19 plays a critical immunosurveillance role in healthy individuals. In contrast, aberrant induction of CCL19, CCL21 and CXCL13 may support the establishment of chronic autoimmunity and hematopoietic tumors within the CNS.

PMID- 19769734
TI  - Dendritic cell-based vaccines for pancreatic cancer and melanoma.
AB  - Based on leads from our recent animal studies, we are embarking on a series of new clinical trials to evaluate potential improvements in dendritic cell (DC)-based vaccines for melanoma and pancreatic cancer. The first new strategy involves the use of a powerful chemokine (denoted secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine; SLC/CCL-21), which can both create functioning tertiary lymphoid structure at sites of vaccination with tumor-loaded DCs and dramatically enhance vaccine efficacy in animal tumor models. Using this strategy, we are embarking on a clinical trial in melanoma patients with the intent to create functioning, ectopic, tertiary lymphoid structure to enhance host antitumor immunity. The second strategy, in the setting of pancreatic cancer, involves a gene therapy and immunotherapy combination of a locally administered tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene vector followed by radiation (to induce tumor apoptosis/necrosis) and intratumorally administered monocyte-derived DCs (to uptake and present antigens from dying tumor cells to elicit potent, systemic, antitumor immunity).

PMID- 25884667
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structures are associated with higher tumor grade in primary operable breast cancer patients.
AB  - BACKGROUND: tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) are highly organized immune cell aggregates that develop at sites of inflammation or infection in non-lymphoid organs. Despite the described role of inflammation in tumor progression, it is still unclear whether the process of tertiary lymphoid structure and biological function of tertiary lymphoid structure in tumors are beneficial or detrimental to tumor growth. In this study we analysed if TLS are found in human breast carcinomas and its association with clinicopathological parameters. METHODS: In a patient group (n=290) who underwent primary surgery between 2011 and 2012 we assessed the interrelationship between the presence of TLS in breast tumors and clinicopathological factors. Prognostic factors were entered into a binary logistic regression model for identifying independent predictors for intratumoral TLS formation. RESULTS: There was a positive association between the grade of immune cell infiltration within the tumor and important prognostic parameters such as hormone receptor status, tumor grade and lymph node involvement. The majority of patients with high grade infiltration of immune cells had TLS positive tumors. In addition to the degree of immune cell infiltration, the presence of TLS was associated with organized immune cell aggregates, hormone receptor status and tumor grade. Tumors with histological grade 3 were the strongest predictor for the presence of TLS in a multivariate regression model. The model also predicted that the odds for having intratumoral TLS formation were ten times higher for patients with high grade of inflammation than low grade. CONCLUSIONS: Human breast carcinomas frequently contain TLS and the presence of these structures is associated with aggressive forms of tumors. Locally generated immune response with potentially antitumor immunity may control tumorigenesis and metastasis. Thus, defining the role of TLS formation in breast carcinomas may lead to alternative therapeutic approaches targeting the immune system.

PMID- 24523438
TI  - Occurrence of tertiary lymphoid structure is associated with T-cell infiltration and predicts better prognosis in early-stage colorectal cancers.
AB  - PURPOSE: Tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes (TIL) play a key role in the clinical outcome of human colorectal cancer; however, the dynamics of their recruitment along colorectal cancer clinical progression have not been fully elucidated. tertiary lymphoid structure (TLT) is an ectopic organized tertiary lymphoid structure that typically forms at sites of chronic inflammation and is involved in adaptive immune responses. Its occurrence in cancer is sporadically documented and its role and clinical relevance is largely unknown. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The occurrence of TLT, the correlation with TILs, and the clinical relevance were evaluated retrospectively, in a cohort study involving a consecutive series of 351 patients with stage II and III colorectal cancer. The role of TLT in lymphocyte recruitment was assessed in a preclinical model of colorectal cancer. RESULTS: In both human colorectal cancer and in a murine model of colorectal cancer, we identified organized TLT, highly vascularized (including high endothelial venules), and correlated with the density of CD3(+) TILs. Intravenous injection in mice of GFP splenocytes resulted in homing of lymphocytes to TLT, suggesting an active role of TLT in the recruitment of lymphocytes to tumor areas. Accordingly, TLT density and TIL infiltration correlated and were coordinated in predicting better patient's outcome among patients with stage II colorectal cancer. CONCLUSIONS: We provide evidence that TLT is associated with lymphocyte infiltration in colorectal cancer, providing a pathway of recruitment for TILs. TLT cooperates with TILs in a coordinated antitumor immune response, when identifying patients with low-risk early-stage colorectal cancer, thus, representing a novel prognostic biomarker for colorectal cancer.

PMID- 17937415
TI  - Inverse opal hydrogel-collagen composite scaffolds as a supportive microenvironment for immune cell migration.
AB  - Immunotherapies harness the inherent potential of the body to destroy foreign or infected cells, and are currently being investigated as treatments for cancer. One way to boost native immune responses might be to engineer tertiary lymphoid structure, providing a supportive microenvironment for immune cell priming, and/or bringing together immune cells at a desired location (e.g., solid tumor sites). Here we describe the development and in vitro testing of composite macroporous poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) hydrogel scaffolds infused with collagen as a tissue engineering platform for immunotherapy. The PEG hydrogel with ordered, interconnected pores provided mechanical stability and the potential to depot supporting cytokines/chemokines, while an infused collagen matrix supported intra-scaffold migration of loaded T cells and dendritic cells. Rapid, nearly unconstrained T cell migration through scaffolds was achieved by using inverse opal supporting structures with 80 microm macropores. In addition, we demonstrated that the lymphoid tissue chemokine CCL21 could be bound to the inverse opal gel walls of these scaffolds, to provide motility-inducing cues for T cells within these structures. This hybrid scaffold approach combines the strengths of the synthetic and biopolymer hydrogels used in a highly synergistic fashion, allowing each material to compensate for limiting properties of its partner.

PMID- 12165506
TI  - Antigen-driven oligoclonal expansion of tumor-infiltrating B cells in infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the breast.
AB  - The objective of this study was to determine whether tumor-infiltrating B cells (TIL-B) of infiltrating ductal carcinoma (IDC) of the breast represent a tumor-specific humoral immune response. Immunohistochemical analysis of three Her-2/neu-negative IDC tumors from geriatric patients showed that TIL-B cluster in structures similar to germinal centers containing CD20(+) B lymphocyte and CD3(+) T lymphocyte zones with interdigitating CD21(+) follicular dendritic cells, suggesting an in situ immune response. A total of 29, 31, and 58 IgG1 H chain clones was sequenced from the three IDC tumors, respectively. Intratumoral oligoclonal expansion of TIL-B was demonstrated by a preponderance (45-68%) of clonal B cells. In contrast, only 7% of tumor-draining lymph node and 0% of healthy donor PBL IgG H chains were clonal, consistent with the larger repertoires of node and peripheral populations. Patterns and levels of TIL-B IgG H chain somatic hypermutation suggested affinity maturation in tertiary lymphoid structure. To examine the specificity of TIL-B Ig, a phage-displayed Fab library was generated from the TIL-B of one IDC tumor. Panning with an allogeneic breast cancer cell line enriched Fab binding to breast cancer cells, but not nonmalignant cell lines tested. However, panning with autologous tumor tissue lysate increased binding of Fab to both tumor tissue lysate and healthy breast tissue lysate. These data suggest an in situ Ag-driven oligoclonal B cell response to a variety of tumor- and breast-associated Ags.

PMID- 21307334
TI  - Salivary glands act as mucosal inductive sites via the formation of tertiary lymphoid structure after site-restricted MCMV infection.
AB  - We investigated the hypothesis that salivary gland inoculation stimulates formation of tertiary lymphoid structure (GCs), transforming the gland into a mucosal inductive site. Intraglandular infection of mice with murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV; control: UV-inactivated MCMV) induces salivary gland ectopic follicles comprising cognate interactions between CD4(+) and B220(+) lymphocytes, IgM(+) and isotype-switched IgG(+) and IgA(+) B cells, antigen presenting cells, and follicular dendritic cells. B cells coexpressed the GC markers GCT (57%) and GL7 (52%), and bound the lectin peanut agglutinin. Lymphoid follicles were characterized by a 2- to 3-fold increase in mRNA for CXCL13 (tertiary lymphoid structure), syndecan-1 (plasma cells), Blimp-1 (plasma cell development/differentiation), and a 2- to 6-fold increase for activation-induced cytidine deaminase, PAX5, and the nonexcised rearranged DNA of an IgA class-switch event, supporting somatic hypermutation and class-switch recombination within the salivary follicles. Intraglandular inoculation also provided protection against a systemic MCMV challenge, as evidenced by decreased viral titers (10(5) plaque-forming units to undetectable), and restoration of normal salivary flow rates from a 6-fold decrease. Therefore, these features suggest that the salivary gland participates in oral mucosal immunity via generation of ectopic GCs, which function as ectopic mucosal inductive sites.

PMID- 26071879
TI  - More than a scaffold: Stromal modulation of tumor immunity.tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - Current clinical success with anti-cancer immunotherapy provides exciting new treatment opportunities. While encouraging, more needs to be done to induce durable effects in a higher proportion of patients. Increasing anti-tumor effector T cell quantity or quality alone does not necessarily correlate with therapeutic outcome. Instead, the tumor microenvironment is a critical determinant of anti-cancer responsiveness to immunotherapy and can confer profound resistance. Yet, the tumor-promoting environment - due to its enormous plasticity - also delivers the best opportunities for adjuvant therapy aiming at recruiting, priming and sustaining anti-tumor cytotoxicity. While the tumor environment as an entity is increasingly well understood, current interventions are still broad and often systemic. In contrast, tumors grow in a highly compartmentalized environment which includes the vascular/perivascular niche, extracellular matrix components and in some tumors lymph node aggregates; all of these structures harbor and instruct subsets of immune cells. Targeting and re-programming specific compartments may provide better opportunities for adjuvant immunotherapy.

PMID- 25999597
TI  - Regulatory B cells in anti-tumor immunity.
AB  - Advances in understanding of the immune microenvironment have highlighted the role of immunosuppressive T cell, myeloid, dendritic and monocytic sub-populations in inhibition of the anti-tumor immune response. The role of B cells in modulating the immune response to solid tumors as well as lymphoid malignancies is less well understood. Murine models of autoimmune disease have defined B regulatory cell (Breg) subsets with immune suppressive activity, including B cell subsets that express IL-10, and transforming growth factor-, which can facilitate T regulatory cell recruitment and expansion. Multiple murine tumor models point to the existence of similar immune suppressive B cell sub-populations that can migrate into tumor deposits and acquire an immune suppressive phenotype, which then leads to attenuation of the local anti-tumor immune response. Other murine models of viral or chemically induced skin carcinogenesis have identified a pivotal role for B cells in promoting inflammation and carcinogenesis. While many human solid tumors demonstrate significant B cell infiltration and/or tertiary lymphoid structure formation, the functional properties of tumor-infiltrating B cells and their effects on immunity are poorly understood. Recent successes in early Phase I/II trials using anti-checkpoint inhibitor antibodies such as nivolumab or pidilizumab directed against PD-1 in the setting of Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas validate the therapeutic utility of reversing B cell-mediated immune suppression. Further studies to define Breg subsets, and mechanisms of suppression, may provide new avenues for modulation of the immune response and meaningful therapeutic intervention in both lymphoid and solid tumors.

PMID- 24609763
TI  - Intrahepatic B-cell follicles of chronically hepatitis C virus-infected individuals lack signs of an tertiary lymphoid structure reaction.
AB  - Chronic infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) often affects the B-cell compartment, leading to the occurrence of autoimmunity and B-cell lymphoproliferation, in particular mixed cryoglobulinemia and B-cell lymphomas. HCV presumably causes these lymphoproliferations by chronic antigenic stimulation and/or direct mutagenic effects on B cells. It has been speculated that the interaction of HCV with B cells and the expansion of antigen-triggered B cells happens in tertiary lymphoid structure in the livers of HCV carriers. We studied rearranged immunoglobulin V(H) genes from seven B-cell follicles microdissected from the livers of three unselected chronic HCV patients. The follicles consisted of polyclonal naive and memory B-cell populations with only rare indication of minor clonal expansions and no evidence for active somatic hypermutation. Frequent detection of V(H) rearrangements using the VH1-69 gene segment nevertheless indicated that at least a fraction of the B cells is HCV-specific and/or autoreactive. Thus, the typical intrahepatic B-cell follicles in chronic HCV carriers do not function as tertiary lymphoid structure for clonal expansion and affinity maturation of B cells. Hence, autoreactive and HCV-specific B-cell clones might either develop in secondary lymphoid organs or in intrahepatic follicles only under particular, yet undefined, circumstances.

PMID- 23335923
TI  - The role of non-hematopoietic stromal cells in the persistence of inflammation.tertiary lymphoid structure.
AB  - Inflammation results from the complex interaction between hematopoietic and stromal cells and growing evidence supports a key role for the stroma in driving the switch from acute resolving to persistence in chronic inflammatory diseases. Stromal cells have also been shown to play a critical role in cancer biology, being involved in cancer growth, dissemination, and inhibition of the autologous immune response, ultimately favoring persistence and metastatic spread. Similarly, blood and lymphatic endothelial cells contribute to tissue homeostasis during physiological inflammation but also lead to discorded leukocyte and tumor cell accumulation in pathological inflammation and cancer. This review aims to summarize the role that pathogenic stroma plays in the pathogenesis of diseases such as cancer and chronic inflammation.

PMID- 21688977
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure in lymphatic malformations.
AB  -  BACKGROUND: Examine lymphatic malformation lymphoid aggregates for the expression of tertiary lymphoid structure markers. Determine how lymphoid aggregate density relates to lymphatic malformation clinical features. METHODS AND RESULTS: Retrospective cohort study. Tissue and clinical data were reviewed from 29 patients in the Vascular Anomaly Database who represented the spectrum of head and neck lymphatic malformations and had >5 years of follow-up. Archived formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded lymphatic malformation tissue was immunohistochemically stained with antibodies for tertiary lymphoid structure markers, which included follicular and mature myeloid dendritic cells, high endothelial venules, segregated B and T-cells, lymphatic endothelial cells, and lymphoid homing chemokines (CXCL13, CCL21). Lymphoid aggregate density (count/mm(2)) was quantified by 2 independent, blinded reviewers. Lymphoid aggregate density and lymphatic malformation clinical features were characterized using analysis of variance. Larger lymphatic malformation tissue lymphoid aggregates stained consistently for tertiary lymphoid structure markers. In oral cavity and neck specimens from the same patients (n=9), there were more tertiary lymphoid structure in oral cavity than in neck specimens (p=0.0235). In lymphatic malformation neck tissue, de Serres stage 4 lymphatic malformations displayed the highest tertiary lymphoid structure density. No significant association was seen between tertiary lymphoid structure density and other clinical features. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that some lymphoid aggregates within lymphatic malformations represent tertiary lymphoid structure. There was an association between tertiary lymphoid structure density and lymphatic malformation location. Further study is required to define the role of tertiary lymphoid structure and tertiary lymphoid structure formation in lymphatic malformation pathogenesis.

PMID- 20339029
TI  - Induction of lymphoidlike stroma and immune escape by tumors that express the chemokine CCL21.
AB  - Tumor manipulation of host immunity is important for tumor survival and invasion. Many cancers secrete CCL21, a chemoattractant for various leukocytes and lymphoid tissue inducer cells, which drive tertiary lymphoid structure. CCL21 expression by melanoma tumors in mice was associated with an immunotolerant microenvironment, which included the induction of lymphoid-like reticular stromal networks, an altered cytokine milieu, and the recruitment of regulatory leukocyte populations. In contrast, CCL21-deficient tumors induced antigen-specific immunity. CCL21-mediated immune tolerance was dependent on host rather than tumor expression of the CCL21 receptor, CCR7, and could protect distant, coimplanted CCL21-deficient tumors and even nonsyngeneic allografts from rejection. We suggest that by altering the tumor microenvironment, CCL21-secreting tumors shift the host immune response from immunogenic to tolerogenic, which facilitates tumor progression.

PMID- 23689000
TI  - [Prognostic value of B lymphocyte infiltration in breast cancer].
AB  - OBJECTIVE: To assess the prognostic value of CD20(+) tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in early-stage breast cancer. METHODS: Paraffin sections were collected from 130 cases of stage I-III breast cancer undergoing surgery between January, 2000 and December, 2002 in our hospital. Immunohistochemistry was used to analyze mesenchymal CD20(+) TILs infiltration in the tumor and evaluate its association with the density of CD4(+) and CD8(+) TILs. The association of CD20(+) TILs was evaluated with the histopathologic features, overall survival (OS), distant disease-free survival (DDFS), and disease-free survival (DFS) of the patients. RESULTS: Aggregations of CD20(+) lymphocytes were observed in 37.69% (49/130) of the cases. CD3(+) T cells were found to aggregate around CD20(+) B cell aggregations to form tertiary lymphoid structure. The aggregations of CD20(+) TILs were positively correlated with the densities of mesenchymal CD8+ and CD4(+) TILs. Overall, CD20(+) TIL aggregations were not significantly correlated with the outcomes of the patients, but multivariate COX regressions suggested that CD20(+) TIL aggregations were positively correlated with DDFS (HR=0.251, 95% CI=0.071-0.894, P=0.033) and OS (HR=0.325, 95% CI=0.103-1.028, P=0.056) in hormone receptor-negative patients but not in the positive patients. Further analysis suggested that post-operative adjuvant endocrine therapy significantly improved the OS of patients positive for hormone receptors without CD20(+) TIL aggregations (P=0.001). CONCLUSION: The long-term therapeutic effects of adjuvant endocrine therapy are correlated with CD20(+) TIL aggregations to affect prognostic value of CD20(+) TIL aggregations in early-stage breast cancer patients.

PMID- 21984922
TI  - Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)-associated multigene signature to assess impact of AID in etiology of diseases with inflammatory component.
AB  - Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is expressed in B cells within germinal centers and is critically involved in class switch recombination and somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin loci. Functionally active AID can additionally be detected within tertiary lymphoid structure developed at sites of chronic inflammation. Furthermore, AID may target non-Ig genes in B- and non-B-cell background. Therefore, AID-associated effects are of increasing interest in disease areas such as allergy, inflammation, autoimmunity, and cancer.Pathway- or disease-relevant multigene signatures have attracted substantial attention for therapeutic target proposal, diagnostic tools, and monitoring of therapy response. To delineate the impact of AID in etiology of multifactorial diseases, we designed the AID-associated 25-gene signature. Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps was used as an inflammation-driven airway disease model; high levels of IgE have been previously shown to be present within polyp tissue. Expression levels of 16 genes were found to be modulated in polyps including AID, IgG and IgE mature transcripts which reflect AID activity; clustering algorithm revealed an AID-specific gene signature for the disease state with nasal polyp. Complementary, AID-positive tertiary lymphoid structure were detected within polyp tissues by in situ immunostaining. Our data demonstrate the class switch recombination and somatic hypermutation events likely taking place locally in the airways and in addition to the previously highlighted markers and/or targets as IL5 and IgE suggest novel candidate genes to be considered for treatment of nasal polyposis including among others IL13 and CD23. Thus, the algorithm presented herein including the multigene signature approach, analysis of co-regularities and creation of AID-associated functional network gives an integrated view of biological processes and might be further applied to assess role of altered AID expression in etiology of other diseases, in particular, aberrant immunity and cancer.

PMID- PMC3007786
TI  - Preferential expression of NF-B-inducing kinase (NIK) in blood vessels of rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue containing ectopic tertiary lymphoid structure.

PMID- 24486365
TI  - CD207 cells recruitment to the vaccination site and draining lymph nodes after the administration of DC-Apo/Nec vaccine in mice.
AB  - De novo tertiary lymphoid structure formation is known to occur in certain disease and inflammatory settings. After an effective vaccination with dendritic cells (DC) charged with melanoma apoptotic/necrotic cells (Apo/Nec), a subcutaneous tertiary lymphoid structure was organized, where retained vaccine cells interacted with recruited inflammatory and T cells. In this work we report for the first time the recruitment of two morphologically different CD207(+) cells to vaccination site. The time-course behavior of CD207(+) cells was reciprocal between vaccination site and draining lymph nodes (DLNs). After 6-10 days, CD207(+) cells localized at the paracortical region of DLNs, in close contact with T cell population. DLNs were enriched in a peculiar MHCII(+) CD11c((-)) CD207(+) population, whose role remains to be determined. Whether CD207(+) cells migration to the vaccination site can be associated with a differential anti-tumoral response remains as an open and exciting question.

PMID- 25968334
TI  - Effector lymphocyte-induced lymph node-like vasculature enables naive T-cell entry into tumours and enhanced anti-tumour immunity.
AB  - The presence of lymph node (LN)-like vasculature in tumours, characterized by expression of peripheral node addressin and chemokine CCL21, is correlated with T-cell infiltration and positive prognosis in breast cancer and melanoma patients. However, mechanisms controlling the development of LN-like vasculature and how it might contribute to a beneficial outcome for cancer patients are unknown. Here we demonstrate that LN-like vasculature is present in murine models of melanoma and lung carcinoma. It enables infiltration by naive T cells that significantly delay tumour outgrowth after intratumoral activation. Development of this vasculature is controlled by a mechanism involving effector CD8 T cells and NK cells that secrete LT3 and IFN. LN-like vasculature is also associated with organized aggregates of B lymphocytes and gp38(+) fibroblasts, which resemble tertiary lymphoid structure that develop in models of chronic inflammation. These results establish LN-like vasculature as both a consequence of and key contributor to anti-tumour immunity.

PMID- 24261777
TI  - IgG4-related epididymo-orchitis associated with bladder cancer: possible involvement of BAFF/BAFF-R interaction in IgG4-related urogenital disease.
AB  - We describe herein a patient who presented with immunoglobulin G4-related disease (IgG4-RD) involving the testis and prostate as well as the submandibular glands. Massive infiltration of IgG4-expressing plasma cells was observed in testis and prostate tissues. Serum concentrations of B cell activating factor belonging to the tumor necrosis factor family (BAFF) were elevated in parallel with serum IgG4 concentrations, and infiltration of BAFF-receptor (BAFF-R)-expressing B cells and BAFF-expressing lymphoid cells was observed around the ectopic lymphoid foci in the affected urogenital tissues. To date, testicular involvement in a patient diagnosed with IgG4-RD had not been reported, making this the first reported case of IgG4-related epididymo-orchitis. These findings suggest that the immune mechanism underlying tertiary lymphoid structure in IgG4-RD may involve enhanced BAFF/BAFF-R interactions among lymphoid cells.

PMID- 24204830
TI  - Chlamydia pneumoniae infection in mice induces chronic lung inflammation, iBALT formation, and fibrosis.
AB  - Chlamydia pneumoniae (CP) lung infection can induce chronic lung inflammation and is associated with not only acute asthma but also COPD exacerbations. However, in mouse models of CP infection, most studies have investigated specifically the acute phase of the infection and not the longer-term chronic changes in the lungs. We infected C57BL/6 mice with 5  10(5) CP intratracheally and monitored inflammation, cellular infiltrates and cytokine levels over time to investigate the chronic inflammatory lung changes. While bacteria numbers declined by day 28, macrophage numbers remained high through day 35. Immune cell clusters were detected as early as day 14 and persisted through day 35, and stained positive for B, T, and follicular dendritic cells, indicating these clusters were tertiary lymphoid structure (iBALTs). Classically activated inflammatory M1 macrophages were the predominant subtype early on while alternatively activated M2 macrophages increased later during infection. Adoptive transfer of M1 but not M2 macrophages intratracheally 1 week after infection resulted in greater lung inflammation, severe fibrosis, and increased numbers of iBALTS 35 days after infection. In summary, we show that CP lung infection in mice induces chronic inflammatory changes including iBALT formations as well as fibrosis. These observations suggest that the M1 macrophages, which are part of the normal response to clear acute C. pneumoniae lung infection, result in an enhanced acute response when present in excess numbers, with greater inflammation, tissue injury, and severe fibrosis.

PMID- 26377895
TI  - Close Encounters of the Tertiary Kind.
AB  - Elucidating the function of tumor-infiltrating regulatory T (Treg) cells has been difficult. In this issue of Immunity, Joshi etal. (2015) demonstrate that Treg cells associated with murine lung cancers are found within tertiary lymphoid structures and actively restrain effector Tcells at the tumor site.

PMID- 26395069
TI  - NCR(+)ILC3 concentrate in human lung cancer and associate with intratumoral lymphoid structures.
AB  - tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) are a common finding in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and are predictors of favourable clinical outcome. Here we show that NCR(+) innate lymphoid cell (ILC)-3 are present in the lymphoid infiltrate of human NSCLC and are mainly localized at the edge of tumour-associated TLSs. This intra-tumoral lymphocyte subset is endowed with lymphoid tissue-inducing properties and, on activation, produces IL-22, TNF-, IL-8 and IL-2, and activates endothelial cells. Tumour NCR(+)ILC3 may interact with both lung tumour cells and tumour-associated fibroblasts, resulting in the release of cytokines primarily on engagement of the NKp44-activating receptor. In patients, NCR(+)ILC3 are present in significantly higher amounts in stage I/II NSCLC than in more advanced tumour stages and their presence correlate with the density of intratumoral TLSs. Our results indicate that NCR(+)ILC3 accumulate in human NSCLC tissue and might contribute to the formation of protective tumour-associated TLSs.

PMID- 25144673
TI  - Decellularized Lymph Nodes as Scaffolds for Tissue Engineered Lymph Nodes.
AB  - BACKGROUND: The lymphatic system is commonly injured during cancer treatment. However, despite the morbidity of these injuries, there are currently no options for replacing damaged lymphatics. The purpose of this study was to optimize methods for decellularization of murine lymph nodes (LN) and to determine if these scaffolds can be used to tissue engineer tertiary lymphoid structure. METHODS AND RESULTS: LNs were harvested from adult mice and subjected to various decellularization protocols. The degree of decellularization and removal of nuclear material was analyzed histologically and quantitatively using DNA isolation. In addition, we analyzed histological architecture by staining for matrix proteins. After the optimal method of decellularization was identified, decellularized constructs were implanted in the renal capsule of syngeneic or allogeneic recipient mice and analyzed for antigenicity. Finally, to determine if decellularized constructs could deliver lymphocytes to recipient animals, the matrices were repopulated with splenocytes, implanted in submuscular pockets, and harvested 14 days later. Decellularization was best accomplished with the detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), resulting in negligible residual cellular material but maintenance of LN architecture. Implantation of decellularized LNs into syngeneic or allogeneic mice did not elicit a significant antigenic response. In addition, repopulation of decellularized LNs with splenocytes resulted in successful in vivo cellular delivery. CONCLUSIONS: We show, for the first time, that LNs can be successfully decellularized and that these matrices have preserved extracellular matrix architecture and the potential to deliver leukocytes in vivo. Future studies are needed to determine if tissue engineered lymph nodes maintain immunologic function.

PMID- 26279095
TI  - A combination hydrogel microparticle-based vaccine prevents type 1 diabetes in non-obese diabetic mice.
AB  - Targeted delivery of self-antigens to the immune system in a mode that stimulates a tolerance-inducing pathway has proven difficult. To address this hurdle, we developed a vaccine based-approach comprised of two synthetic controlled-release biomaterials, poly(lactide-co-glycolide; PLGA) microparticles (MPs) encapsulating denatured insulin (key self-antigen in type 1 diabetes; T1D), and PuraMatrix(TM) peptide hydrogel containing granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and CpG ODN1826 (CpG), which were included as vaccine adjuvants to recruit and activate immune cells. Although CpG is normally considered pro-inflammatory, it also has anti-inflammatory effects, including enhancing IL-10 production. Three subcutaneous administrations of this hydrogel (GM-CSF/CpG)/insulin-MP vaccine protected 40% of NOD mice from T1D. In contrast, all control mice became diabetic. In vitro studies indicate CpG stimulation increased IL-10 production, as a potential mechanism. Multiple subcutaneous injections of the insulin containing formulation resulted in formation of granulomas, which resolved by 28 weeks. Histological analysis of these granulomas indicated infiltration of a diverse cadre of immune cells, with characteristics reminiscent of a tertiary lymphoid structure, suggesting the creation of a microenvironment to recruit and educate immune cells. These results demonstrate the feasibility of this injectable hydrogel/MP based vaccine system to prevent T1D.

PMID- 23108700
TI  - The immune microenvironment of human tumors: general significance and clinical impact.
AB  - Human cancers grow in a microenvironment of stromal, inflammatory and immunocompetent cells which is variable from tumor to tumor. The characterization of the immune contexture, i.e. the type, density and functional orientation of immunocompetent cells, the presence or absence of tertiary lymphoid structures is a major prognostic factor for patients survival and represent a guide and a target for innovative cancer therapies. 

PMID- 26013585
TI  - COPD and squamous cell lung cancer: Aberrant inflammation and immunity is the common link.
AB  - Cigarette smoking has reached epidemic proportions within many regions of the world and remains the highest risk factor for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and lung cancer. Squamous cell lung cancer (SCC) is commonly detected in heavy smokers, where risk of developing lung cancer is not solely defined by tobacco consumption. Although therapies that target common driver mutations in adenocarcinomas are showing some promise, they are proving ineffective in smoking-related SCC. Since COPD is characterised by an excessive inflammatory and oxidative stress response, this review details how aberrant innate, adaptive and systemic inflammatory processes can contribute to lung cancer susceptibility in COPD. Activated leukocytes release increasing levels of proteases and free radicals as COPD progresses and tertiary lymphoid structure accumulate with increasing severity. Reactive oxygen species promote formation of reactive carbonyls that are not only tumorigenic through initiating DNA damage, but can directly alter the function of regulatory proteins involved in host immunity and tumor suppressor functions. Systemic inflammation is also markedly increased during infective exacerbations in COPD and the interplay between tumor-promoting Serum Amyloid A (SAA) and Interleukin-17A are discussed. SAA is also an endogenous allosteric modifier of the FPR2 receptor expressed on immune and epithelial cells, and the therapeutic potential of targeting this receptor is proposed as a novel strategy for COPD-lung cancer overlap.

PMID- 24477000
TI  - Intramuscular therapeutic vaccination targeting HPV16 induces T cell responses that localize in mucosal lesions.
AB  - About 25% of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasias (CIN2/3) caused by human papillomavirus serotype 16 (HPV16) undergo complete spontaneous regression. However, to date, therapeutic vaccination strategies for HPV disease have yielded limited success when measured by their ability to induce robust peripheral blood T cell responses to vaccine antigen. We report marked immunologic changes in the target lesion microenvironment after intramuscular therapeutic vaccination targeting HPV16 E6/E7 antigens, in subjects with CIN2/3 who had modest detectable responses in circulating T lymphocytes. Histologic and molecular changes, including markedly (average threefold) increased intensity of CD8(+) T cell infiltrates in both the stromal and epithelial compartments, suggest an effector response to vaccination. Postvaccination cervical tissue immune infiltrates included organized tertiary lymphoid structure in the stroma subjacent to residual intraepithelial lesions and, unlike infiltrates in unvaccinated lesions, showed evidence of proliferation induced by recognition of cognate antigen. At a molecular level, these histologic changes in the stroma were characterized by increased expression of genes associated with immune activation (CXCR3) and effector function (Tbet and IFN), and were also associated with an immunologic signature in the overlying dysplastic epithelium. High-throughput T cell receptor sequencing of unmanipulated specimens identified clonal expansions in the tissue that were not readily detectable in peripheral blood. Together, these findings indicate that peripheral therapeutic vaccination to HPV antigens can induce a robust tissue-localized effector immune response, and that analyses of immune responses at sites of antigen are likely to be much more informative than analyses of cells that remain in the circulation.

PMID- 24484236
TI  - Presence of B cells in tertiary lymphoid structures is associated with a protective immunity in patients with lung cancer.
AB  - RATIONALE: It is now well established that immune responses can take place outside of primary and secondary lymphoid organs. We previously described the presence of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) characterized by clusters of mature dendritic cells (DCs) and T cells surrounded by B-cell follicles. We demonstrated that the density of these mature DCs was associated with favorable clinical outcome. OBJECTIVES: To study the role of follicular B cells in TLS and the potential link with a local humoral immune response in patients with NSCLC. METHODS: The cellular composition of TLS was investigated by immunohistochemistry. Characterization of B-cell subsets was performed by flow cytometry. A retrospective study was conducted in two independent cohorts of patients. Antibody specificity was analyzed by ELISA. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Consistent with TLS organization, all stages of B-cell differentiation were detectable in most tumors. Germinal center somatic hypermutation and class switch recombination machineries were activated, associated with the generation of plasma cells. Approximately half of the patients showed antibody reactivity against up to 7 out of the 33 tumor antigens tested. A high density of follicular B cells correlated with long-term survival, both in patients with early-stage NSCLC and with advanced-stage NSCLC treated with chemotherapy. The combination of follicular B cell and mature DC densities allowed the identification of patients with the best clinical outcome. CONCLUSIONS: B-cell density represents a new prognostic biomarker for NSCLC patient survival, and makes the link between TLS and a protective B cell-mediated immunity.

PMID- 21715359
TI  - Lymphoid organisation in labial salivary gland biopsies is a possible predictor for the development of malignant lymphoma in primary Sjogren's syndrome.
AB  -  OBJECTIVE: The development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) confers a high risk of mortality in primary Sjgren's syndrome (pSS) patients, but the sensitivity and specificity of proposed lymphoma predictors are insufficient for practical use. The performance of lymphoid organisation in the form of germinal centre (GC)-like lesions was evaluated in labial salivary gland biopsies taken at pSS diagnosis as a potential lymphoma-predicting biomarker. METHODS: Labial salivary gland tissue biopsies available from two Swedish pSS research cohorts (n=175) were re-evaluated by light microscopy in a blind study in order to identify tertiary lymphoid structure as a sign of tertiary lymphoid structure formation and organisation. A linkage study was performed with the Swedish Cancer Registry for lymphoma identification. The risk of developing NHL in GC-positive patients in comparison with GC-negative patients was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier statistics and log-rank test. Associations between tertiary lymphoid structure and clinical and/or laboratory disease markers were also determined using (2) or Fisher's exact tests. RESULTS: At diagnosis, 25% of pSS patients had tertiary lymphoid structure in their salivary glands. Seven of the 175 patients studied (14% GC+ and 0.8% GC-) developed NHL during 1855 patient-years at risk, with a median onset of 7 years following the initial diagnostic salivary gland biopsy. Six of the seven patients had tertiary lymphoid structure at diagnosis; the remaining patient was GC negative at the time of diagnosis (p=0.001). CONCLUSIONS: The detection of tertiary lymphoid structure by light microscopy in pSS diagnostic salivary biopsies is proposed as a highly predictive and easy-to-obtain marker for NHL development. This allows for risk stratification of patients and the possibility to initiate preventive B-cell-directed therapy.

PMID- 21703392
TI  - Unique tertiary lymphoid structure-like structures present in human primary colorectal carcinoma are identified by immune gene array profiling.
AB  - We hypothesized that immune gene-related signatures would predict the presence of unique histological features of lymphoid cell infiltrates in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) that correlate with clinical parameters. Metagene analysis with gene chip technology was performed on 326 CRCs, which were then sorted by low versus high gene scores. Microscopically, CRCs with a high gene score revealed a marked host immune response organized, remarkably, as lymphoid follicles. Proliferation involved both B and T cells. In every case, the presence of CD79a(+) B-cell precursors was identified, suggesting that the lymphoid follicles represent newly formed, tertiary lymphoid structure-like structures. CD21(+) dendritic cells were present within the follicular germinal centers, and CD3(+) T cells were localized mainly in the parafollicular cortex zone surrounding the B-cell area of the follicles. A strong correlation between a 12-chemokine gene subset of the molecular profile and the presence of tertiary lymphoid structure-like structures was associated with better patient survival independent of tumor staging, site location, microsatellite instability or stability, and patient treatment. These findings suggest beneficial, intratumoral immune cell priming and raise the possibility of immunotherapy intervention decisions based on molecular signatures that can identify the presence of tumor-localized, tertiary lymphoid structure-like structures.

PMID- 25705114
TI  - Analysis of the intratumoral adaptive immune response in well differentiated and dedifferentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma.
AB  - Treatment options are limited in well differentiated (WD) and dedifferentiated (DD) retroperitoneal liposarcoma. We sought to study the intratumoral adaptive immune response and explore the potential feasibility of immunotherapy in this disease. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were isolated from fresh surgical specimens and analyzed by flow cytometry for surface marker expression. Previously reported immune cell aggregates known as tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) were further characterized by immunohistochemistry. In all fresh tumors, TILs were found. The majority of TILs were CD4 T cells; however cytotoxic CD8 T cells were also seen (average: 20% of CD3 T cells). Among CD8 T cells, 65% expressed the immune checkpoint molecule PD-1. Intratumoral TLS may be sites of antigen presentation as DC-LAMP positive, mature dendritic cells were found juxtaposed next to CD4 T cells. Clinicopathologic correlation, however, demonstrated that presence of TLS was associated with worse recurrence-free survival in WD disease and worse overall survival in DD disease. Our data suggest that an adaptive immune response is present in WD/DD retroperitoneal liposarcoma but may be hindered by TLS, among other possible microenvironmental factors; further investigation is needed. Immunotherapy, including immune checkpoint blockade, should be evaluated as a treatment option in this disease.

PMID- 24636534
TI  - Lymphotoxin and TNF: how it all began-a tribute to the travelers.
AB  - The journey from the discoveries of lymphotoxin (LT) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) to the present day age of cytokine inhibitors as therapeutics has been an exciting one with many participants and highs and lows; the saga is compared to that in "The Wizard of Oz". This communication summarizes the contributions of key players in the discovery of the cytokines and their receptors, the changes in nomenclature, and the discovery of the LT family's crucial role in secondary and tertiary lymphoid structure. The remarkable advances in therapeutics are detailed as are remaining problems. Finally, special tribute is paid to two pioneers in the field who have recently passed away: Byron H. Waksman and Lloyd Old.

PMID- 24286296
TI  - Efficacy and safety of rituximab treatment in early primary Sjogren's syndrome: a prospective, multi-center, follow-up study.
AB  - INTRODUCTION: Primary Sjgren's syndrome (pSS) is an autoimmune disorder affecting exocrine glands; however, a subgroup of pSS patients experience systemic extra-glandular involvement leading to a worsening of disease prognosis. Current therapeutic options are mainly empiric and often translated by other autoimmune diseases. In the last few years growing evidence suggests that B-cell depletion by rituximab (RTX) is effective also in pSS. Patients with early active disease appear to be those who could benefit the most from RTX. The aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of RTX in comparison to disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) in early active pSS patients. METHODS: Forty-one patients with early pSS and active disease (EULAR Sjogren's syndrome disease activity index, ESSDAI  6) were enrolled in the study. Patients were treated with either RTX or DMARDs in two different Rheumatology centers and followed up for 120 weeks. Clinical assessment was performed by ESSDAI every 12 weeks up to week 120 and by self-reported global disease activity pain, sicca symptoms and fatigue on visual analogic scales, unstimulated saliva flow and Schirmer's I test at week 12, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120. Laboratory assessment was performed every 12 weeks to week 120. Two labial minor salivary gland (MSG) biopsies were obtained from all patients at the time of inclusion in the study and at week 120. RESULTS: Our study demonstrated that RTX treatment results in a faster and more pronounced decrease of ESSDAI and other clinical parameters compared to DMARDs treatment. No adverse events were reported in the two groups. We also observed that RTX is able to reduce glandular infiltrate, interfere with B/T compartmentalization and consequently with the formation of tertiary lymphoid structure and tertiary lymphoid structure in pSS-MSGs. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first study performed in a large cohort of early active pSS patients for a period of 120 weeks. We showed that RTX is a safe and effective agent to be employed in pSS patients with systemic, extra-glandular involvement. Furthermore, our data on pSS-MSGs provide additional biological basis to employ RTX in this disease.

PMID- 21904218
TI  - Adeno-associated virus-mediated local delivery of LIGHT suppresses tumorigenesis in a murine cervical cancer model.
AB  - LIGHT is a tumor necrosis factor superfamily ligand that is considered as a promising candidate for cancer therapy. It has a potent antitumor activity through establishing tertiary lymphoid structure inside tumor sites and recruiting naive T cells into the tumor. In this study, we examined the possibility of antitumor activity by expressing LIGHT in cervical cancer (CC) model. A recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector was chosen for the transfer, based on its transfection efficiency and lack of detectable pathology. In vitro transfer of recombinant AAV vector expressing LIGHT (AAV-LIGHT) stimulated T-lymphocyte proliferation and activation. AAV-mediated gene transfer of LIGHT by intratumoral injection exerted a very potent antitumor effect against preexisting TC-1 cell CC in C57BL/6 mice. This study confirmed that AAV-LIGHT regressed tumor growth by activating cytotoxic T lymphocyte, enhancing infiltration of inflammatory cells in tumor and increasing stimulatory cytokine expression in tumor microenvironment. Therefore, AAV-LIGHT therapy might have potential utility for the treatment of CC.

PMID- 21835696
TI  - How dendritic cells shape atherosclerosis.
AB  - Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease of the arteries, which results in major morbidity and mortality. Immune cells initiate and sustain local inflammation. Here, we focus on how dendritic cell (DC)-mediated processes might be relevant to atherosclerosis. Although only small numbers of DCs are detected in healthy arteries, these numbers dramatically increase during atherosclerosis development. In the earliest fatty streaks, DCs are found next to the vascular endothelium. During plaque growth, new DCs are actively recruited, and their egress from the vessel wall is dampened. In the adventitia next to mature atherosclerotic lesions, tertiary lymphoid structure develop, which also contain DCs. Thus, DCs probably participate in all stages of atherosclerosis from fatty streaks to mature lesions.

PMID- 26445971
TI  - High mobility group B1 and N1 (HMGB1 and HMGN1) are associated with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in HER2-positive breast cancers.
AB  - Although the prognostic and predictive significance of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in HER2-positive breast cancers has been established, the drivers of TIL influx remain unclear. We tested whether potential triggers for this response could include high mobility group B1 and N1 (HMGB1 and HMGN1) proteins, which are immunogenic damage-associated molecular pattern molecules. We evaluated TILs and the immunohistochemical expression of HMGB1 and HMGN1 in 447 HER2-positive breast cancer tissues. Normal luminal cells exhibited nuclear expression of HMGB1 and HMBN1. The nuclear and cytoplasmic expression levels of HMG proteins showed a significant inverse correlation (rho=-0.150, p=0.001 for HMGB1; rho=-0.247, p<0.001 for HMGN1). Low levels of HMGB1 and HMGN1 nuclear expression were identified in 185 (41.4%) and 208 (46.5%) cases, respectively. High levels of cytoplasmic HMGB1 and HMGN1 expression were identified in 107 (23.9%) and 49 (11.0%) cases, respectively. High cytoplasmic expression of HMG proteins was significantly associated with a high histological grade, high levels of TILs, peritumoral lymphocytic infiltration, and tertiary lymphoid structures in HER2-positive breast cancer tissues. Tumors with low levels of cytoplasmic HMGB1 and HMGN1 showed significantly lower levels of TILs than those with high levels of each or both HMG proteins. However, the nuclear or cytoplasmic expression of either HMG protein was not found to be significantly associated with survival. High levels of cytoplasmic HMGB1 and HMGN1 protein expression correlated with high levels of TILs in HER2-positive breast cancers. The manipulation of HMGB1 and HMGN1 could represent an immunotherapeutic approach to promote TIL influx into a tumor.

PMID- 24634379
TI  - Emerging immunologic biomarkers: setting the (TNM-immune) stage.
AB  - The cooperation of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and tertiary lymphoid structure in early-stage colorectal carcinoma further corroborates the strong immune influences on tumor progression and patient outcome. Immune factors in the tumor microenvironment may warrant inclusion in pathology reports and staging systems for prognostication and prediction of therapeutic response.

PMID- 23762866
TI  - Bovine papillomavirus type 2 infection and microscopic patterns of urothelial tumors of the urinary bladder in water buffaloes.
AB  - Microscopic patterns of thirty-four urothelial tumors of the urinary bladder of water buffaloes from the Marmara and Black Sea Regions of Turkey are here described. All the animals grazed on lands rich in bracken fern. Histological diagnosis was assessed using morphological parameters recently suggested for the urinary bladder tumors of cattle. Papillary carcinoma was the most common neoplastic lesion (22/34) observed in this study, and low-grade carcinoma was more common (seventeen cases) than high-grade carcinoma (five cases). Papilloma, papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential (PUNLMP), and invasive carcinomas were less frequently seen. Carcinoma in situ (CIS) was often detected associated with some papillary and invasive carcinomas. De novo (primary) CIS was rare representing 3% of tumors of this series. A peculiar feature of the most urothelial tumors was the presence in the tumor stroma of immune cells anatomically organized in tertiary lymphoid structure (TLOs). Bovine papillomavirus type-2 (PV-2) E5 oncoprotein was detected by molecular and immunohistochemistry procedures. Early protein, E2, and late protein, L1, were also detected by immunohistochemical studies. Morphological and molecular findings show that BPV-2 infection contributes to the development of urothelial bladder carcinogenesis also in water buffaloes.

PMID- 24942756
TI  - Immunotherapy converts nonimmunogenic pancreatic tumors into immunogenic foci of immune regulation.
AB  - Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is considered a "nonimmunogenic" neoplasm. Single-agent immunotherapies have failed to demonstrate significant clinical activity in PDAC and other "nonimmunogenic" tumors, in part due to a complex tumor microenvironment (TME) that provides a formidable barrier to immune infiltration and function. We designed a neoadjuvant and adjuvant clinical trial comparing an irradiated, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-secreting, allogeneic PDAC vaccine (GVAX) given as a single agent or in combination with low-dose cyclophosphamide to deplete regulatory T cells (Treg) as a means to study how the TME is altered by immunotherapy. Examination of resected PDACs revealed the formation of vaccine-induced intratumoral tertiary lymphoid structure in 33 of 39 patients 2 weeks after vaccine treatment. Immunohistochemical analysis showed these aggregates to be regulatory structures of adaptive immunity. Microarray analysis of microdissected aggregates identified gene-expression signatures in five signaling pathways involved in regulating immune-cell activation and trafficking that were associated with improved postvaccination responses. A suppressed Treg pathway and an enhanced Th17 pathway within these aggregates were associated with improved survival, enhanced postvaccination mesothelin-specific T-cell responses, and increased intratumoral Teff:Treg ratios. This study provides the first example of immune-based therapy converting a "nonimmunogenic" neoplasm into an "immunogenic" neoplasm by inducing infiltration of T cells and development of tertiary lymphoid structures in the TME. Post-GVAX T-cell infiltration and aggregate formation resulted in the upregulation of immunosuppressive regulatory mechanisms, including the PD-1-PD-L1 pathway, suggesting that patients with vaccine-primed PDAC may be better candidates than vaccine-nave patients for immune checkpoint and other immunomodulatory therapies.

PMID- 25083321
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure: A gateway for T cells in the tumor microenvironment.
AB  - Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes influence colorectal cancer progression. We have recently documented that tertiary lymphoid structure in the colorectal cancer microenvironment orchestrates lymphocyte infiltration and that tertiary lymphoid structure and lymphocytes cooperate in a coordinated antitumor immune response to improve patient outcome. Thus, tertiary lymphoid structure represents a potential target in the design of tailored immune-based therapeutic approaches.

PMID- 25550797
TI  - Prognostic value of immune cell infiltration, tertiary lymphoid structures and PD-L1 expression in Merkel cell carcinomas.
AB  - Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is an aggressive, virus-associated, neuroendocrine tumor of the skin mainly affecting immunocompromised patients. Higher intratumoral infiltration with CD3 and CD8 positive T-cells is associated with a better prognosis, highlighting the relevance of the immune system for MCC development and progression. In this study 21 primary MCCs were stained with immune cell markers including CD3, CD4, CD8, CD68, CD20, and S100. Furthermore, tumor-infiltrating neutrophils, tertiary lymphoid structures and PD-L1 expression were analyzed and correlated with overall and recurrence free survival. All MCCs were Merkel Cell Polyomavirus positive. Overall and recurrence-free survival did not correlate with intra- and peritumoral CD3 and CD8 T-cell infiltration. In addition, no significant association regarding prognosis was found for tumor-associated neutrophils, tumor-associated macrophages or PD-L1 positivity in MCCs. Interestingly, the presence of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) in the tumor microenvironment significantly correlated with recurrence-free survival (P=0.025). In addition, TLS were significantly associated with a higher CD8/CD4 ratio in the tumor periphery (P=0.032), but not in the center of the tumor (P > 0.999). These results demonstrate for the first time that TLS, easily assessed in paraffin-embedded tissue in the tumor periphery of MCCs, may be a valuable prognostic factor indicating prolonged recurrence free survival.

PMID- 23151182
TI  - The interplay between the gut immune system and microbiota in health and disease: nutraceutical intervention for restoring intestinal homeostasis.
AB  - Gut immune system is daily exposed to a plethora of antigens contained in the environment as well as in food. Both secondary lymphoid tissue, such as Peyer's patches, and lymphoid follicles (tertiary lymphoid structure) are able to respond to antigenic stimuli releasing cytokines or producing antibodies (secretory IgA). Intestinal epithelial cells are in close cooperation with intraepithelial lymphocytes and possess Toll-like receptors on their surface and Nod-like receptors (NLRs) which sense pathogens or pathogen-associated molecular patterns. Intestinal microbiota, mainly composed of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, generates tolerogenic response acting on gut dendritic cells and inhibiting the T helper (h)-17 cell anti-inflammatory pathway. This is the case of Bacteroides fragilis which leads to the production of interleukin-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine, from both T regulatory cells and lamina propria macrophages. Conversely, segmented filamentous bacteria rather induce Th17 cells, thus promoting intestinal inflammation. Intestinal microbiota and its toxic components have been shown to act on both Nod1 and Nod2 receptors and their defective signaling accounts for the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). In IBD a loss of normal tolerance to intestinal microbiota seems to be the main trigger of mucosal damage. In addition, intestinal microbiota thanks to its regulatory function of gut immune response can prevent or retard neoplastic growth. In fact, chronic exposure to environmental microorganisms seems to be associated with low frequency of cancer risk. Major nutraceuticals or functional foods employed in the modulation of intestinal microbiota are represented by prebiotics, probiotics, polyunsaturated fatty acids, amino acids and polyphenols. The cellular and molecular effects performed by these natural products in terms of modulation of the intestinal microbiota and mostly attenuation of the inflammatory pathway are described.

PMID- 24366885
TI  - Dendritic cells in tumor-associated tertiary lymphoid structures signal a Th1 cytotoxic immune contexture and license the positive prognostic value of infiltrating CD8+ T cells.
AB  - Tumor-infiltrating T cells, particularly CD45RO(+)CD8(+) memory T cells, confer a positive prognostic value in human cancers. However, the mechanisms that promote a protective T-cell response in the tumor microenvironment remain unclear. In chronic inflammatory settings such as the tumor microenvironment, tertiary lymphoid structure can occur to create local tertiary lymphoid structure known as tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS). These structures can exacerbate a local immune response, such that TLS formation in tumors may help promote an efficacious immune contexture. However, the role of TLS in tumors has yet to be investigated carefully. In lung tumors, mature dendritic cells (DC) present in tumor-associated TLS can provide a specific marker of these structures. In this study, we evaluated the influence of TLS on the characteristics of the immune infiltrate in cohorts of prospective and retrospective human primary lung tumors (n = 458). We found that a high density of mature DC correlated closely to a strong infiltration of T cells that are predominantly of the effector-memory phenotype. Moreover, mature DC density correlated with expression of genes related to T-cell activation, T-helper 1 (Th1) phenotype, and cytotoxic orientation. Lastly, a high density of TLS-associated DC correlated with long-term survival, which also allowed a distinction of patients with high CD8(+) T-cell infiltration but a high risk of death. Taken together, our results show how tumors infiltrated by TLS-associated mature DC generate a specific immune contexture characterized by a strong Th1 and cytotoxic orientation that confers the lowest risk of death. Furthermore, our findings highlight the pivotal function of TLS in shaping the immune character of the tumor microenvironment, in promoting a protective immune response mediated by T cells against cancer.

PMID- 21445235
TI  - Chemokine binding protein M3 of murine gammaherpesvirus 68 modulates the host response to infection in a natural host.
AB  - Murine -herpesvirus 68 (MHV-68) infection of Mus musculus-derived strains of mice is an attractive model of -herpesvirus infection. Surprisingly, however, ablation of expression of MHV-68 M3, a secreted protein with broad chemokine-binding properties in vitro, has no discernable effect during experimental infection via the respiratory tract. Here we demonstrate that M3 indeed contributes significantly to MHV-68 infection, but only in the context of a natural host, the wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus). Specifically, M3 was essential for two features unique to the wood mouse: virus-dependent tertiary lymphoid structure (iBALT) in the lung and highly organized secondary follicles in the spleen, both predominant sites of latency in these organs. Consequently, lack of M3 resulted in substantially reduced latency in the spleen and lung. In the absence of M3, splenic germinal centers appeared as previously described for MHV-68-infected laboratory strains of mice, further evidence that M3 is not fully functional in the established model host. Finally, analyses of M3's influence on chemokine and cytokine levels within the lungs of infected wood mice were consistent with the known chemokine-binding profile of M3, and revealed additional influences that provide further insight into its role in MHV-68 biology.

PMID- 23778140
TI  - CD4 follicular helper T cell infiltration predicts breast cancer survival.
AB  - CD4 T cells are critical regulators of immune responses, but their functional role in human breast cancer is relatively unknown. The goal of this study was to produce an image of CD4 T cells infiltrating breast tumors using limited ex vivo manipulation to better understand the in vivo differences associated with patient prognosis. We performed comprehensive molecular profiling of infiltrating CD4 T cells isolated from untreated invasive primary tumors and found that the infiltrating T cell subpopulations included follicular helper T (Tfh) cells, which have not previously been found in solid tumors, as well as Th1, Th2, and Th17 effector memory cells and Tregs. T cell signaling pathway alterations included a mixture of activation and suppression characterized by restricted cytokine/chemokine production, which inversely paralleled lymphoid infiltration levels and could be reproduced in activated donor CD4 T cells treated with primary tumor supernatant. A comparison of extensively versus minimally infiltrated tumors showed that CXCL13-producing CD4 Tfh cells distinguish extensive immune infiltrates, principally located in tertiary lymphoid structure germinal centers. An 8-gene Tfh signature, signifying organized antitumor immunity, robustly predicted survival or preoperative response to chemotherapy. Our identification of CD4 Tfh cells in breast cancer suggests that they are an important immune element whose presence in the tumor is a prognostic factor.

PMID- 18243731
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structure and local immunity.
AB  - Ectopic or tertiary lymphoid structure develop at sites of inflammation or infection in peripheral, non-lymphoid organs. These tissues are architecturally similar to conventional secondary lymphoid organs, with separated B and T cell areas, specialized populations of dendritic cells, well-differentiated stromal cells and high endothelial venules. tertiary lymphoid structure are often associated with the local pathology that results from chronic infection or chronic inflammation. However, there are also examples in which tertiary lymphoid structure appear to contribute to local protective immune responses. Here we review how tertiary lymphoid structure develop and function in the context of local immunity and pathology.

PMID- 23923082
TI  - Breast implant-associated ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma: a case report and discussion of possible pathogenesis.
AB  - Breast implant associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL) is a recently recognized clinical entity, with only 39 well-documented cases reported worldwide, including 3 fatalities. Because of its rarity, the clinical and pathologic features of this malignancy have yet to be fully defined. Moreover, the pathogenesis of ALCL in association with textured silicone gel breast implants is poorly understood. Here we report a case of BIA-ALCL arising in a 67-year-old woman with a mastectomy due to breast cancer followed by implantation of textured silicone gel breast prosthesis. The patient presented with breast enlargement and tenderness 8 years following reconstructive surgery. MRI revealed a fluid collection surrounding the affected breast implant. Pathologic examination confirmed the presence of malignant ALCL T cells that were CD30+, CD8+, CD15+, HLA-DR+, CD25+ ALK- and p53. A diagnosis of indolent BIA-ALCL was made since tumor cells were not found outside of the capsule. Interestingly, an extensive mixed lymphocytic infiltrate and tertiary lymphoid structure (tertiary lymphoid structure) adjacent to the fibrous implant capsule were present. The patient was treated with capsulectomy and implantation of new breast prostheses. Six months later, the patient was found to have BIA-ALCL involvement of an axillary lymph node with cytogenetic evolution of the tumor. To our knowledge, this is the sixth reported case of aggressive BIA-ALCL. Unique features of this case include the association with tertiary lymphoid structure and the in vivo cytogenetic progression of the tumor. This case provides insight into the potential role of chronic inflammation and genetic instability in the pathogenesis of BIA-ALCL.

PMID- 25083325
TI  - tertiary lymphoid structures in human lung cancers, a new driver of antitumor immune responses.
AB  - T-cell infiltrates are robust prognostic biomarkers in the majority of human cancers. However, the mechanisms that shape a protective T-cell response remain unclear. Our recent study implicates tertiary lymphoid structures in the shaping of an efficient and beneficial immune response in lung cancer patients.

PMID- 23230435
TI  - Follicular dendritic cells, conduits, lymphatic vessels, and high endothelial venules in tertiary lymphoid structure: Parallels with lymph node stroma.
AB  - In this communication, the contribution of stromal, or non-hematopoietic, cells to the structure and function of lymph nodes (LNs), as canonical secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs), is compared to that of tertiary lymphoid structure or organs (TLOs), also known as tertiary lymphoid structure. TLOs can arise in non-lymphoid organs during chronic inflammation, as a result of autoimmune responses, graft rejection, atherosclerosis, microbial infection, and cancer. The stromal components found in SLOs including follicular dendritic cells, fibroblast reticular cells, lymphatic vessels, and high endothelial venules and possibly conduits are present in TLOs; their molecular regulation mimics that of LNs. Advances in visualization techniques and the development of transgenic mice that permit in vivo real time imaging of these structures will facilitate elucidation of their precise functions in the context of chronic inflammation. A clearer understanding of the inflammatory signals that drive non-lymphoid stromal cells to reorganize into TLO should allow the design of therapeutic interventions to impede the progression of autoimmune activity, or alternatively, to enhance anti-tumor responses.

